SALE OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY 
 
Section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 defines Sale as: 
 
“Sale is a transfer of ownership in exchange for a price paid or promised or part-paid or part-
promised. ” 
 
 The contract for sale of immovable property must be in writing.  
 Section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 lays down the duties, obligation and 
rights of the vendor and purchaser under an agreement of sale, as well as for sa le in case of 
absence of contract to the contrary.  
 Sale deed is chargeable with the stamp duty.  
 Where the value of the immovable property is more than Rs. 100, it is required to be 
compulsorily registered.  
 An agreement for sale and sale deed should clearly show: who are the parties to the 
contract (Vendor/Vendee or Vendor/Purchaser or Seller/Buyer); the subject matt er; the 
intention to sell and buy; the price agreed and how it is to be paid and other terms of the 
contract.  
 The contract for sale of immovable property is usually preceded by an agreement f or 
sale 
 
AGREEMENT FOR SALE 
 
THIS AGREEMENT is made at …………on this …………day of……….  
BETWEEN 
Mr. A aged……..s/o……….r/o….. (hereinafter referred to as the VENDOR which expression 
shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof shall mean and include h is heirs, 
executors, administrators and assigns of the FIRST PART). 
AND  
Mr. B aged ……….s/o……….r/o….. (hereinafter referred to as the VENDEE/PURCHASER 
which expression shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof shall mean and  
include his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns of the SECOND PART). 
WHEREAS the Vendor is the absolute owner of the property bearing 
no…….admeasuring….situated at………(hereinafter referred to as the said property).  
AND WHEREAS the Vendor has agreed to sell the said property to the Vendee at the price 
and on the conditions mentioned hereinafter. 
 107  
NOW IT IS AGREED BETWEEN THE PARTIES AS FOLLOWS: 
 
1. The Vendor hereby agrees to sell, transfer and convey the said property in favour  of 
the Vendee. 
2. That the consideration of Rs….is to be paid by the Vendee to the Vendor. Rs…..is to 
be paid at the execution of this agreement as earnest money. Rs….on…..(date) and lastly  
Rs….at the time of final sale deed.  
3. The Vendor acknowledges the payment of Rs….as earnest money paid in 
cash/cheque/dd no…drawn on ……(Bank  name and Branch) by Vendee. 
4. The Vendor shall make out a marketable title of the said property free from 
encumbrances and reasonable doubts. 
5. The Vendor shall deliver to the Vendee the title deeds relating to the said pr operty in 
his possession and power on execution of these presents for inspection and i nvestigation of 
the title by the Vendee or his advocate. 
6. The Vendor agrees to apply for, obtain and furnish unto the Vendee all such 
permissions as may be necessary under the laws for registration of Sale Deed. 
7. The Vendor and the Vendee hereby agree that the sale will be completed within six 
months from the date hereof. 
8. All the taxes, levies etc due and payable against the said property shall be paid by th e 
Vendor till the completion of sale and thereafter it will be the responsibi lity of the purchaser. 
The Vendor shall handover all the tax receipts etc. duly paid to the Vendee at t he time of 
completion of sale. 
9. The Vendor agrees to handover actual, physical and vacant possession of the said 
property unto the Vendee at the time of sale deed. 
10. That the expenses towards the payment of stamp duty, registration charges and al l 
other incidental expenses for agreement for sale and sale deed shall be borne out by the 
Vendee. 
11. If the Vendor fails to make out the clear marketable title to the said pr operty as 
aforesaid then the Vendee will have the right to cancel this agreement by gi ving atleast fifteen 
days notice to the Vendor and after the expiration of fifteen days the agreement shal l stand 
terminated and the Vendor agrees to return the earnest money to the Vendee. 
12. If the Vendee fails to perform his obligations under this agreement within the time 
stipulated then the Vendor shall be entitled to cancel this agreement by giving atleast fifteen 
days notice in writing to the Vendee. On termination the Vendor will be entitled to forfeit the 
earnest money paid by the Vendee. 
 108  
 
SCHEDULE OF PROPERTY 
Details of the property to be mentioned. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF parties hereunto have  signed this document on the date and pla ce 
first above written in the presence of following witnesses. 
           
          VENDOR 
           
          VENDEE 
                                                                                       
       
WITNESSES:   (1)          
            (2)               
* * *