COMPLAINT UNDER OF THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC 
VIOLENCE ACT, 2005 
 
IN THE COURT OF CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE / CHIEF METROPOLITAN 
MAGISTRATE  
COMPLAINT NO. …….OF 2017  
U/S 12 0F DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT  
                                                                                              
IN THE MATTER OF :- 
Smt. X  
W/o Late Sh. Y                                                                                                           
R/o………..        …Complainant  
Versus 
Sh. Z  
S/o 
R/o        …Respondent    
           
        Police Station:  
 
COMPLAINT  UNDER SECTION 12 OF THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM 
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005 
Most Respectfully Showeth:  
 
1. That the Respondent is the father- in- law of the Complainant  who is harassing and 
torturing the Petitioner by illegal act of violence in order to throw her out of  the matrimonial 
home. 
2. That the Petitioner was married to Late Sh. Y on …..as per Hindu rites and 
ceremonies and thereafter started living in the matrimonial home as a joint fami ly along with 
the Respondent and that out of the wedlock following two children were born who are in the 
care and custody of the complainant. The husband of the complainant died on …..due to 
illness  
S.No. Name of 
Children Relation  Age  Status 
1 Master A  Son  8 Studying in 
class IV 
2 Baby B Daughter 5 Studying in 
class I 
 
3. That before his death Sh. Y engaged in the manufacturing and trading of Auto par ts 
and was having factory at rented accommodation at …….and was running as sole proprie tor 
by the name and style of M/s….. and was also running a shop on ground floor.  
 89    
4. That after the death of the husband of the Complainant on …the Respondent has 
misappropriated the machines, tools raw materials etc. lying in the factory of  the husband of 
the complainant and has also trespassed into the shop, belonging to husband of the 
complainant. 
5. That the shop of the husband and Complainant has been taken over by the 
Respondent who doesn ’t allow the complainant to enter the same and to run the same. 
6. That the Respondent is economically harassing the complainant as he has taken over 
the shop and doesn ’t pay any amount to the complainant who has no money and has no 
earnings at all and is dependent upon the shop of her husband for maintenance  
7. That not only this, the Respondent maltreats the complainant in one way or the othe r 
and abuses her in filthy language and want her to vacate the second floor of the pr operty so 
that they may trespass in to the same.  
8. That the Respondent threatens the Complainant with the dire consequences on not  
vacating the second floor of the property. 
9. That hence Complainant is left with no other alternative but to file the in stant 
complaint under Section 12 of Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act as 
complainant. 
10. That the complainant has domestic relationship with the Respondent as Respondent 
was living with the complainant before the death of her husband. 
11. That the deeds and misdeeds of the Respondent are affecting the health and safety of 
the complainant as well as her two children as after the death of her, the Respondent wants the 
children to stop going to the school and be sent to an orphanage. 
12. That the complaint under Section 12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic 
Violence Act, 2005  is being filed as such by the aggrieved person.  
13.  That it is prayed that the Hon ’ble court may take cognizance of the complaint and 
pass all/ any of the orders, as deemed necessary in the circumstances of the case.  
14. Orders prayed for are:  
I. Protection Order under Section 18 directing Respondent to stay away from 
Complainant and not to interfere in her possession of the ground floor, second floor of the 
property in any manner whatsoever 
II. Residence Order under Section 19 directing the Respondent to restrain from 
dispossessing the Complainant from the second and the third floor of property no. …. (  
specifically shown in red in site plan enclosed) and to restraint from i nterfering in the 
possession of the Complainant on the ground floor of the property including the shop in 
property no.  
III. Monetary Relief under Section 20 directing the Respondent to pay the following 
expenses as monetary relief 
a. Food, clothes, medications and other basic necessities- Rs 15000 p.m. 
b. School fees and related expenses – Rs 10000 p.m. amounting to total of Rs 25,000 
p.m.  
IV. Compensation under Section 22 for causing mental agony and physical suffering by 
the complainant as deemed fit by this Hon ’ble Court. 
 
 90    
PRAYER  
It is, therefore, most respectfully, prayed that this Hon ’ble Court be pleased to grant the 
relief(s) claimed herein and pass such orders as this Hon ’ble Court may deem fit and proper 
under the given facts and circumstances of the case for protecting the Complainant from 
domestic violence. 
                                                                                                                                            
         Complainant  
                                                                                                          Through  
                                                                                                                        Advocate 
VERIFICATION  
Verified at Delhi on this day of …….that the contents of the paras 1 to …. of the ab ove 
complaint are true and correct to my knowledge and nothing material has been concea led 
there from . 
                                                                                                               Complainant 
 
 To be accompanied by an affidavit  
* * *