EXECUTION APPLICATION  
IN THE COURT OF ____________________________ 
EXECUTION  PETITION NO. _____ OF 2017  
IN 
CIVIL SUIT NO. ________ OF 2015 
 
A                                                                                          … DECREE HOLDER  
Versus 
B                                                                                           …JUDGMENT DEBTOR  
 
THE DECREE HOLDER PRAYS FOR EXECUTION OF THE DECREE/ORDE R 
DATED DD/MM/YYYY, THE PARTICULARS WHEREOF ARE STATED IN THE  
COLUMNS HEREUNDER:- 
                                                                                                Police Station:- 
 
 1. No. of Suit    
 2. Name of Parties   
 
 3. Date of Decree/order of which 
execution is sought   
 
 4. Whether an appeal was filed against 
the decree / order under execution   
 
 5. Whether any payment has been 
received towards satisfaction of decree-
order   
 
 6. Whether any application was made 
previous to this and if so their dates 
and results   
 
 7. Amount of suit along with interest as 
per decree or any other relief granted 
by the decree   
 
8. Amount of costs if allowed by Court   
9. Against whom execution is sought   
10 In what manner court ’s assistance is 
sought   
 
PRAYER: 
The Decree Holder prays that the execution of the decree passed in the case may be granted.  
   
                                                                                                  Decree Holder 
Place:      Through 
Date:                                                                                      Advocate of Decree Holder  
 
 37    
 
VERIFICATION:              
Verified on…..at…… that the contents of this application are true to my knowledge or belief. 
                                                                                             
          Decree 
Holder  
                                                                         
  
Note: Students are required to fill in the details in the table above as per the facts of the c ase. 
 
* The application for execution shall be accompanied by a duly certified copy of the decree or 
order, or by the Original, or by the Minutes of decree or order until the decree or order is 
drawn up. Judge may allow execution before sealing of decree order. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 38    
PETITIONS UNDER THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955 
Before giving any model form of application under the matrimonial laws, it is  necessary to 
know what kind of petitions are contemplated in matrimonial causes. The Hindu Marr iage 
Act, 1955, has provided for the following important petition: 
 
1.Petition for restitution of conjugal rights (sec. 9) 
2.Petition for judicial separation (sec. 10) 
3.Petition for void or nullity of marriage (sec. 11) 
4.Petition for divorce by dissolution of marriage (sec. 13) 
5.Petition for maintenance pendent lite (sec.24) 
6.Petition for alimony and maintenance (sec. 25) 
7.Petition for custody of children (sec.26)  
Such reliefs are also obtained under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, the Indian Divorce A ct, 
1889, and other personal laws.  
Under the rules farmed by the Bombay High Court it is necessary to state the following facts 
in the petition for (i) judicial separation, (ii) Nullity of marri age, and (iii) Divorce in addition 
to the point given in O. VII, r. 1, C.P.C. and S. 20(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act .  (i) Place 
and date of marriage, (ii) name of the state of domicile of the wife and husband before and 
after marriage (iii) the principal permanent address where there is any cohabited incl uding the 
address where they raised together, (iv) birth or ages of such issues, (v) whether  there had 
been any proceeding in India, if so what wre they and with what result, and on behalf o f 
whom? (vi) Matrimonial offences or offence charged should be set out in separate paragraphs 
with time and place of its commission, (vii) property presented at or about the time of 
marriage and jointly owned by both husband and wife , and (viii)relief or reliefs prayed for. 
All matrimonial petitions shall lie in the Court of the District Judg e (Family Courts wherever 
established) within whose local limits of the jurisdiction the marriage was  solemnised, or 
within whose local limit of the jurisdiction the parties to the marriage l ast resided together, or 
within whose jurisdiction the respondent has been residing; but in the Metr opolis of Mumbai, 
Calcutta, Chennai and Ahmadabad, these petition shall lie in the City Civil Court  of the 
respective metropolitan town. 
 
By virtue of Section 14 Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Petition for Divorc e cannot be 
presented with in one year of marriage unless leave is taken from the court to presen t before 
on the ground of exceptional hardship. 
The Petitions under Hindu Marriage act are to be presented before Distric t Judge within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction 
(a) The Marriage was solemnized; or 
 39    
(b)  The respondent at the time of presentation of the petition, resides, or  
(c) The parties to the marriage last resided together, or 
(d) In case the wife is the petioner, where she is residing on the date of presentation of 
the petition, or  
(e) The petioner is residing at the time of presentation of the petition in  a case where the 
respondent is, at the time, residing outside the territories to which th Act extends, or has not 
been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons who w ould 
naturally have heard of him if he were alive. 
 
The districts in which the Family Courts have been established under Family Cour ts Act, 
1984, the petitions shall lie before the Principal Judge, Family Court ( Section 7 and 8 Fami ly 
Courts Act, 1984) 
Every petition shall state distinctly the following facts- 
(a) That the marriage of the petioner was solemnized with the respondent in accordance 
with Hindu rites and ceremonies on ….at…..and and affidavit to the effect has to be enclosed  
(b) That there is no collusion between the petitioner and the other party in present ing the 
petiotion for annulment of the marriage. This fact need not be pleaded in case of pet ition 
under section 11 of the Act. 
(c) In case the Petion for Divorce is filed on the ground of cruelty of the respondent, it 
has to be specificaaly pleaded that the petioner has not condoned the act of the respondent. 
(d)  Where the petition for divorce on mutual consent is filed, affidavits of both t he 
parties are to be attached.  
(e) In case of petition for Restitution of Conjugal rights, it has to be plea ded that the 
respondent has withdrawn from the company of petitioner without any reasonable caus e. 
(f) In the petition under the Act, the details regarding the status and place of resi dence of 
the parties to the marriage before the marriage and at the time of presentat ion of the petition 
have to be provided.  
* * *