LEASE DEED 
 
THIS LEASE DEED is made and executed at Delhi on ………(Date)  
BETWEEN 
Smt. Sudarshan Kaur W/o Sh. Paramjit Singh R/o H. No. M-170, Greater Kailash-II, New 
Delhi hereinafter referred to as the LESSOR, which expression shall unle ss excluded or 
repugnant to the context to be deemed to include legal heirs i.e. Mr. Paramjit Singh, Husband  
of Lessor herein, successors, executors, administrators, representatives and assigns of the 
FIRST PART. 
AND  
M/s. Dave Thomson Associates (India) Pvt. Ltd. having its registered office at Satyug -Villa 
1st Floor,  5, Gurunanak Nagar off Shankarshet Road, Pune through, their Director Mr. H . R. 
Srinivas to enter into these presences hereinafter referred to as the LESSEE  which expression 
unless excuded or repugnant to the context shall include and mean, successors, successors  in 
interest and assigns of the SECOND PART. 
 
WHEREAS the Lessor has represented to the Lessee  that she is the owner/landlady of the 
Basement portion of the construction at M-170, Greater Kailash-II, New Delhi admeasuri ng 
760 Sq. ft. approximate covered area in the said premises and is desirous of letting out the 
same, hereinafter referred to as the demised premises. 
AND WHEREAS the Lessee has offered to take the demised premises on Lease and the  
Lessor has agreed to let out the same on the terms and conditions hareinafter specified. 
 
NOW THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSETH AS UNDER: 
 
1. T
hat the Lessor hereby conveys to the Lessee the basement portion of the said premises 
admeasuring 760 Sq. ft. Approx for a  period of  24 months with effect from 1st Sept. 1993 at 
a monthly, rent of Rs. 4000/- (Rs. Four thousand only) exclusive of Electricity, water cha rges, 
actual bills/ rental charges of Telephone/Fax whenever installed in the demised premises.    
2. T
hat the Lease will be for an initial period of 24 months with effect from …….. The rent will 
be increased by 10% of the rent payable per annum immediately after expiry of ev ery 12 
months. 
3.  
That both, the Lessor and the Lessee have the right to terminate the Lease even bef ore the 
expiry of the Lease period, by giving 3 months written notice.  
 113  
4. T
hat the Lessor shall have the option to renew the Lease for a further period of 2 years at the 
terms and conditions as laid out by the Lessor. 
5. T
hat on the date of execution of this Lease Deed, the Lessee had paid a sum of R s. 36000/- 
(Rs. Thirty Six Thousand only) vide pay order No….dated….drawn on……….as security 
deposit which will be kept by the Lessor for the due performance of the terms and condit ions 
of this Lease, free of interest. On termination of the Lease, the Lessor  shall refund the 
security deposit/unadjusted advance rent, if any. In case the Lessor fails to refund the se curity 
Deposit/balance advance rent, the Lessee shall be entitled to charge interest at the rate of 21% 
per annum from the date of termination of Lease till the date of refund. Aditional ly,  the 
Lessee shall be entitled to hold possession of the property till the refund of  security 
deposit/unadjusted advance rent alongwith interest, if any is made without payment  of 
rent/Lease money. This will be applicable only on production of documentary proof by the  
Lessee to the Lessor that all dues pertiaining to electricity and any other cha rges payable by 
the Lessee have been cleared upto date. 
6. T
he Lessee covenants with Lessor as under :  
i) That the Lessee agrees to pay a monthly rent of Rs. 4000/- (Rs. Four thousand only) 
mentioned above on or before 7th day of every month. 
ii) That the Lessee agree to carry out minor repairs or replacement of broken parts in  
electrical and sanitary installations and glasses himself, but major repairs pe rtaining to the 
structure of the house will have to be done by the Lessor, as and when considered neces sary 
by him. However, the Lessee shall handover the vacant physical possession to the Lessor  on 
termination of this Lease in the same conditions as it has been handed over to him. 
iii) That the Lessee shall give vacant possession of the premises to the Lessor  after the 
expiry of the Lease period. 
iv) That the Lessee shall duly comply with all the rules and regulations of l ocal authorities 
with regard to the use of the premises. 
v) That the Lessee shall pay the electricity charges in accordance with the bill s at rates 
determined by DESU and accordance with bills/demands received from DESU, NDMC 
including meter rents etc. The meter readings on the date of possession will be duly recorded. 
vi) That the demised premises have been let out to the Lessee for authorised use only. 
vii) That the Lessee shall permit the Lessor or his duly authorised agents during  reasonable 
hours in the day time to enter upon the demised premises for inspection of the Lessor ’s 
fixtures and fittings therein, and the premises as may be deemed fit by the Lessor. 
viii) That the Lessee at the expiry of this Lease shall deliver peaceful and vacant possession 
of the demised premises to the Lessor together with the fittings and fixtur es installed in good 
condition as the same are at present, reasonable wear and tear and damage by fire, 
earthquake, civil commotion, act of God excepted including lightening to fitti ngs etc. but 
excluding telephones, fax computers and air conditioners. No fixtures, wood work etc. carried 
 114  
by the Lessee shall be removed/damaged at the time of handing over vacant possession of the 
demised premises. 
ix) That the Lessee shall not make any alteration of permanent nature within the pr emises 
as well as in the open space, without the written consent of the Lessor. 
x) That the Lessee shall keep the premises in good tenantable condition and shall not 
cause any loss/ damage to it, subject to normal wear and tear of the premises. 
xi) The Lessee shall observe and perform at all time during the continuance of the terms 
hereby created all the terms and conditions herein as contained. 
xii) That the Lessee will not park any motor car or any other vehicle in this outer drive way 
of the premises at any time both inside and outside the main gate. 
 
7. That the Lessor hereby covenants with Lessee as follow:- 
i) That the Lessor has good right and full power and absolute authority to Lease  the 
demised premises to the Lessee in manner herein contained. 
ii) That the Lessor shall not interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of the proper ty by the 
Lessee whether directly on indirectly. 
iii) That the Lessor shall observe and perform at all times during the continuance of this 
deed, all the terms and conditions contained in the Lease deed by virtue of whic h the Lessor 
is holding the said premises and shall keep the Lessee indeminified against an y breach or 
consequences thereof. 
iv) That the Lessor shall pay the taxes whether Municipal or otherwise and fai ling to pay 
any such amount when the same shall fall due for payment, the Lessee shall be entitled to pay 
the same on behalf of the Lessor and to deduct the amount so paid from the rent payable by 
the Lessee to the Lessor hereunder. 
v) That the Lessor shall comply with, at his own cost, all requirements and regulations of 
the Municipals or other lawful authority concerning the demised premises to the observed by 
the owner/landlady. 
8. It is hereby mutually agreed and declared by the parties hereto as follows :- 
i) In the event of the demised premises or any part thereof being destroyed or damaged by 
fire, earth quake, flood, war, air raid, civil commotion, riots or any act o f God or irrestible 
force during the period of the Lease, this Lease shall at the option of the Lessee be 
terminated. And in the event of the Lessee being desirous of any part thereof as the case may 
be so as to enable the Lessor to repair the damage or reinstate the same and the rents hereby 
reserved shall remain suspended till the demised premises or any part thereof as th e case may 
be reinstated or restored to its former state and possession if delivered over to the Lessee for 
the remaining part of this Lease, if any. 
ii) That in the event of any dispute or difference arising out of this deed, the matter w ill be 
referred to the Arbitrator to be appointed by consent of both the parties and his dec ision will 
be binding on both the parties. 
 115  
iii) That the parties to the agreement have specifically agreed that considering the location, 
accommodation, and condition of the said property, the Lease rent is fair rent and in 
consonance with the property, market rates. 
iv) That the terms and conditions of this agreement as stated above shall be binding on 
both the parties. 
v) That the Lease shall automatically come to an end on the expiry of the Lease period. 
The peaceful and vacant possession of the demised premises will be deemed to have been 
handed over by the Lessee to the Lessor. 
vi) The cost of preparation of the original Lease and duplicate thereof and stamps and 
registration fee and in connection with the same shall be borne and paid by the Lessee. 
vii) The Lessor shall retain the original of the Lease deed and the Lessee the duplica te 
thereof. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, these presents have been executed by the parties hereto on the 
day, month and year first mentioned herein above in presence of witness: 
LESSOR   
       LESSEE  
Witnesses:            (1)                        (2)                       
 
 
Note: Read Section 105 to Section 111 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.     
* * *