MORTAGAGE DEED 
 
THIS DEED OF MORTGAGE is executed at Delhi on this …..day of …….   
BY 
 
Mr. A son of Sh. ____ resident of ____ hereinafter called the MORTGAGOR, which 
expression shall mean and include his heirs, legal representatives, executors, administr ators 
and assigns of the First Part;  
IN FAVOUR OF 
M/s ABC Ltd., a company incorporated under the Companies Act having its registered office  
at ___ hereinafter called the MORTGAGEE, which expression shall mean and include its 
successors. 
WHEREAS the Mortgagor has vide sale-deed dated 5.1.1988 purchased a vacant residential 
plot bearing Municipal No. A-25 situated at Ashok vihar , Delhi   
AND WHEREAS, the Mortgagor wants to construct a residential building on the af oresaid 
vacant plot of land;  
AND WHEREAS the Mortgagor does not have enough financial means to undertake the 
construction of the residential building on the aforesaid plot of land;  
AND WHEREAS the Mortgagee, with whom the Mortgagor is presently employed, has 
agreed to advance a loan of Rs.2,00,000/- ( Rupees Two lakhs only ) to the Mortgagor, and 
which loan shall be utilized by the Mortgagor towards the construction of a resident ial house 
on the above vacant plot of land.  
AND WHEREAS in consideration of the aforesaid amount of Rs. 2,00,000/- borrowed by t he 
Mortgagor from the Mortgagee, the Mortgagor has agreed to execute this Mortgag e deed of 
the vacant plot of land in favour of the Mortgagee.  
 
NOW THIS DEED, THEREFORE WITNESSES AS UNDER:  
 1. The Mortgagor admits and acknowledges that he owes a sum of Rs.2,00,000/- to the 
Mortgagee on the basis of promissory note and receipt dated …..  executed by him in favour of 
the Mortgagee.  
 2. The Mortgagor shall be lible to pay interest on the above stated principal sum  of Rs. 
2,00,000/- @12% per annum form the date of the loan until payment and in this manner the 
total charge of the referred property of the Mortgagor shall be the principa l sum of Rs. 
2,00,000/-  and interest accruing thereupon.  
 3. The Mortgagor will pay to the Mortgagee the said sum of Rs. 2,00,00/- in equa l 
monthly installment of Rs.2000/- per month on or before the ……….  and in the meantime 
interest thereon or on such thereof as shall for the time being remain unpaid, at the r ate of 
12% per annum by half yearly payments on the ……….  and the ………  in each year.  
 117  
 4. That any interest not paid on the due dates shall be treated as principal and add ed to the 
principal sum herby secured and bear interest at the rate and payable on the half yearl y days 
aforesaid.  
 5. In consideration of the aforesaid, the Mortgagor hereby transfer by way of simple 
mortgage to the Mortgagee, a vacant residential plot bearing Municipal No. A-25, Ashok 
Vihar, Delhi.  
 6. By this deed, the Mortgagor also mortgages to the Mortgagee any building and all other 
permanent structures that shall be built on the aforesaid vacant plot by the Mortgagor.  
 7. The Mortgagor hereby covenants with the Mortgagee as follows :  
 (i) That the said premises are free from all encumbrances and the Mortgagor undert akes 
that until the entire principal amount and interest, if any due, is not paid back t o the 
Mortgagee, the Mortgagor shall not create any fresh mortgage, charge, pledge, or in any other  
manner, alienate the corpus or his interest in the aforesaid property to any third person. 
 (ii) If the Mortgagor fails to pay the sum with interest after it has  become payable under 
the provisions of the this deed, the Mortgagee shall, in addition to any other remedy  available 
to him under the law, have the power to sell without the intervention of a Court the mortgaged 
property or any part thereof for the realization of the money due to it hereunder.  
 (iii) During the continuance of the Mortgage, the Mortgagor shall keep any buildi ng or 
permanent structure erected on the aforesaid plot of land insured against damag e by fire in the 
name of the Mortgagor with an Insurance Company and shall punctually pay all premium on 
such insurance and shall produced to the Mortgagee on demand, the policy of such insurance  
and the receipt for the premium so paid.  
 Provided always, that if the Mortgagor shall make default in any of the above matters, t he 
Mortgagee may, in its discretion, insure and keep insured all or any of the said buil ding and 
permanent structures to the amount aforesaid and that the expenses of doing shall be repaid t o 
it by the Mortgagor on demand, and until so paid shall be added to the principal  money 
hereby secured and bear interest accordingly and be secured in the like manner as the s aid 
principal.  
IN WITNESSES WHEREOF the Mortgagor has executed this document on the date, first 
above written.  
MORTGAGOR  
 
MORTGAGEE  
WITNESSES  
 
1. 
2. 
* * *