PARTNERSHIP DEED 
THIS DEED OF PARTNERSHIP is executed at New Delhi on this ……day of ……..  
BETWEEN 
Sh. X S/o _____  R/o____, hereinafter called ‘THE FIRST PARTY ’ which expression shall 
mean and include his heirs, successors, executors and legal representatives. 
AND  
Sh. Y S/o Sh. ____ R/o ______, hereinafter called ‘THE SECOND PARTY ’ which 
expression shall mean and include his heirs, successors, executors and legal representatives. 
WHEREAS the First Party is in occupation as a tenant of property measuring 1000 sq. ft. on 
the ground floor bearing No. E-1 Ram Nagar, Delhi. 
AND WHEREAS the First Party is desirous of carrying on the business of interior decoration 
and the Second Party, being experienced in this trade, has approached the First Part y to run 
this business with him jointly in partnership. 
AND WHEREAS the parties have agreed to commence and run the business of interior 
decoration, furnishing, manufacture and sale of furnishing, manufacture and sale of fur niture, 
soft furnishing and accessories in partnership.  
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS DEED WITNESSES AS UNDER: 
1. The name and style of this partnership business shall be M/s XYZ. 
2. The business of this partnership shall be considered to have commenced on ………  
3. That the principal place of business of this partnership shall be at E-1 Ram nagar, Delhi. 
However, the same may be shifted or carried on elsewhere as well with the mutual consent of 
both the parties from time to time. 
4. That the business of the partnership shall be interior decoration, furnishing, manufac ture 
and sale of furniture, soft furnishing and accessories. However, the parties w ill also be 
entitled to extend their activities into business or manufacturing of any other item as well . 
5. The shares of the parties in the profits and losses shall be as follows : 
i) First Party – 51%         ii)           Second Party – 49% 
6. The initial capital has been contributed by both the parties by investing a sum  of Rs. 
15,000/- each.  If and when more funds are required for the business, the partners shall invest 
the same.  However, any capital investment of the partners shall not carry any inter est. In case 
loans or deposits are raised from outside i.e. friends and relations of the partner or th e 
financial institutions then only those loans or deposits, which are taken with the written 
consent of both the partners and are entered in the books of accounts of the partnershi p, shall 
be binding on the firm.   
7. The partnership shall maintain regular books of accounts in accordance with the customs 
of trade and all dealings of the partnership shall be duly recorded in the sam e.  The account 
books etc. shall be maintained in the place of business at . E-1 Ram Nagar, Delhi. 
 119  
8. Each of the partners shall be entitled to withdraw a sum of Rs. 2000/- every month whic h 
shall be adjustable in the final profit and loss account to be prepared every year. 
9. The First Party shall also be entitled to withdraw a sum of Rs. 5000/- per month tow ards 
the rent he is paying to the Landlord in respect of the portion of property no. E-1 Ram Nagar, 
Delhi 
10. The tenancy rights in respect of property no. E-1 Ram Nagar, Delhi shall alway s vest in 
the First Party and whenever the partnership is dissolved for any reason whatsoever, th e 
Second Party shall not be entitled to any right, title or interest in the same. 
11. That the partnership shall maintain proper books of accounts in the normal course of 
business at the principal place of its business and the same shall always be open for inspection 
to the partners. 
12. That the first accounting period of the partnership shall close on 31st March…  and 
thereafter the financial year, shall run from 1st April every year to 31st March of the 
subsequent of the English calendar. 
13. That the bank accounts of the partnership and / or its branches shall be operated under the  
signatures of any of the partners. 
14. That at the close of the accounting period / year, a trial balance, profit and lo ss account 
and balance-sheet etc. shall be prepared and the profit and loss in the ration enumerated a bove 
shall be credited / debited to the capital account of the partners. 
15. That either of the parties would not be entitled to carry on similar or competitive trade 
individually or in partnership and in any other manner. 
16. The partnership shall be at Will.  However, whenever any party intends to diss olve the 
same or retire from the same, he shall give an advance notice of 15 days to the other party and 
during the period of notice, profit and loss account, balance sheets shall be completed to 
finalize the accounts in between as partiers as well as with the outsiders. 
17. That in the event of any dispute arising between the parties with respect to any  clause of 
this document or the working of the partnership or for anything indicated thereo f,  the same 
shall be decided by arbitration in accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration Act and by 
no other process. 
18. That in all other matters not provided herein, the partnership shall be governed  by the 
Indian Partnership Act as applicable from time to time. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have signed this document on the date first above  
written in presence of the following witnesses.       
                                                                                                             FIRST     PARTY  
         SECOND PARTY 
 
WITNESSES  (1)           (2)                       
 
* * *