SUIT FOR RECOVERY UNDER ORDER XXXVII OF CPC   
 
IN THE COURT OF DISTRICT JUDGE (DISTRICT __________). ROHINI COURT, 
DELHI  
SUIT NO ……………. OF    20..  
(SUIT UNDER ORDER XXXVII OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908) 
 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
M/s ABC Pvt. Ltd. 
A Company Incorporated Under the  
Companies Act, Having Its Registered Office  
At ………, New Delhi.     
Through its Director 
Shri……………………  
       ……….. PLAINTIFF  
VERSUS 
M/s XYZ Ltd. 
A Company Incprporated Under The  
Companies Act. Having Its Registered Office  
At ……….,  Delhi                 
Through its Director 
Shri……………………                  …….. DEFENDANT  
 
 
SUIT FOR RECOVERY OF RS. 4, 19,200/-(Four lakh nineteen thousand two hundred 
Only) UNDER ORDER XXXVII OF CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908  
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the Plaintiff is a Company constituted under the Companies Act having its register ed 
office at B-40, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi. Mr. P. Executive Director of the Pla intiff is a 
duly constituted attorney of the Plaintiff and is authorized and competent to sig n and verify 
the plaint, vakalatnama etc. and to institute this suit on behalf of the Plaintiff. 
2. That the Plaintiff carries on the business of construction, engineering and desi gning. The 
Plaintiff is a builder of international repute and has earned a big name in its business. 
3. That the Defendant is a Company incorporated under the Companies Act having their 
registered office at …… Chandigarh.  
4. That the Defendant approached the Plaintiff for construction of a building for their paper 
mill at Chand igarh some time in the year …. . 
 11    
5. That the plaintiff and the defendant entered into an agreement for the construction of  a 
building a sper the site plan and specifications. 
6. That the Plaintiff constructed the building and handed over the possession of the same t o 
the Defe ndant sometime in….. .(date). 
7. That on ………(date) , the Plaintiff raised the final bill for Rs. 4,19,200/- on the 
Defendant on account of the construction of their paper mill at Chandigarh agai nst which the 
Defendant handed over c heque No. 213456 dated ……..(date)  for Rs. 4,19,200/- drawn on 
Punjab National Bank, Shahdara, Delhi to the Plaintiff. 
8. That the cheque was presented by the Plaintiff, however the same was dishonoured upon 
presentation vide bank memo dated……     
9. That the Plaintiff immediately informed the Defendant about the dishonour of the sai d 
cheque and called upon the Defendant to make the payment of the said amount along with 
interest @ 18% per annum. However, the Defendant failed to pay the same to the Plaintiff 
despite repeated requests and reminders. 
10. That the Plaintiff therefore finally issued a legal notice dated …….(date) to the Defendant 
calling upon the Defendant to clear the outstanding amount of Rs. 1,39,492/- along wit h 
interest at the rate of 18% per annum w.e.f. ……..(date)  upto the date of payment. However, 
no payment has been made by the Defendant despite the said notice. 
11. That the Defendant is now liable to pay a sum of Rs. 4,19,200/- along with interest  @ 
18% per annum from the date on the Plaintiff ’s bill. The Plaintiff is, claiming interest 
from……(date)  upto the date of filing of this suit @ 18% per annum. 
12. That the cause of action in favour of the Plaintiff and against the Defendant fir st arose in 
2000 when the Plaintiff was approached by the Defendant for construction of their paper mill. 
It further arose in ……..  when the said building was completed and handed over to the 
Defendant and on …….  when the Plaintiff submitted the final bill for Rs. 4,19,200/- to the 
Defendant. The cause of action arose on all dates when the Plaintiff called upon the 
Defendant to make the payment and the later failed to comply with it. The cause of  action is 
still subsisting as the Defendant has failed to pay the outstanding amount despite repeated oral 
and written requests and reminders from the Plaintiff. 
13. The suit is within the period of limitation. 
14. This Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to entertain this suit because the part of t he cause of 
action arose at Delhi. The contract for construction of the paper mill was en tered at Delhi, all 
the payments upto this date have been made at Delhi and the payment of the outstanding 
amount was also to be made at Delhi. The Administrative Office of the Defendan t is situated 
at Delhi where they carry on the work for their gain. 
15. The value of this suit for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction is Rs. - -------- on 
which court fee of Rs. ___________is paid. 
16. That this suit is filed under Order XXXVII of the Code of Civil Procedure and no relief 
has been claimed which does not fall within the ambit of Order XXXVII. 
 
 12    
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to :- 
 (a) Pass a decree for Rs. 4,19,200/-(Four Lakhs Nineteen Thousand and Two   
Hundred only) with interest @ 18% per annum from ……(date)  upto the date of filing the suit 
in favour of the Plaintiff and against the Defendant; 
(b) award pendentlite and future interest at the rate of 18% per annum on the above stated 
amount of Rs. 4,19,200/-(Four Lakhs Nineteen Thousand and Two Hundred only) with 
interes t @ 18% per annum from …..(date)  upto the date of filing the suit in favour of the 
Plaintiff and against the Defendant; 
 (c) award cost of the suit in favour of the Plaintiff and against the Defendant; and  
 (d) pass such other and further order(s) as may be deemed fit and proper on the  
  facts and in the circumstances of this case. 
 
                                                                                                        Plaintiff  
Place:                              Through              
Date:                                                   Advocate 
 
VERIFICATION: 
Verified at Delhi on this 1st day of  January 20… that the contents of paras 1 to …  of the 
plaint are true to my knowledge derived from the records of the Plaintiff maint ained in the 
ordinary course o f its business, those of paras ….  to .... are true on information received and 
believed to be true and last para is the humble prayer to this Hon ’ble Court. 
         
 Plaintiff  
 
[NOTE : The above plaint  must be supported by an Affidavit] 
 
Note: A student should mention the correct paragraphs in the verification and also focu s on 
territorial and pecuniary jurisdiction. 
* * *