SALE DEED 
 
THIS SALE DEED is made at …………on this …………day of……….  
BETWEEN 
Mr…… aged……..s/o……….r/o….. (hereinafter referred to as the VENDOR which 
expression shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof shall mean and include 
his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns of the FIRST PART). 
AND  
Mr……. aged ……….s/o……….r/o….. (hereinafter referred to as the 
VENDEE/PURCHASER which expression shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning 
thereof shall mean and include his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns of the 
SECOND PART). 
WHEREAS  the vendor purchased a freehold residential plot measuring 300 sq. yds. and 
bearing No.170 in ‘M’ Block of the residential colony known as Greater Kailash Part-II, New 
Delhi vide sale deed dated 6.8.85 registered in the office of the Sub-Registrar,  New Delhi as 
document No. 5560 Addl. Book No. I, Vol. No. 5318 at pages 136 to 152 on 6.8.85. 
The aforementioned plot is bounded as under :- 
EAST ... ROAD     N ORTH … PLOT NO.  M-168 
WEST… SERVICE LANE  S OUTH … PLOT NO. M-172 
 
AND  WHEREAS   the Vendor after purchasing the said plot, got the building plan sanctioned 
from the Municipal Corporation of Delhi vide their letter/file No. 400 /B/85 dated 13.12.85. 
Then the Vendor caused construction thereon of residential building on different floor levels. 
 
AND  WHEREAS  the Vendor has agreed to sell and the Vendee has agreed to purchase part 
of Basement (760 Sq. ft. approx), one front Bed Room of the First Floor (wi th attached bath 
room and small balcony) of the said building on ‘as is where is ’ basis for a total consideration 
of Rs. 2,50,000/- (Rupees two lacs and fifty thousand only) on the terms and condit ions set 
forth hereinafter. 
NOW THIS SALE DEED WITNESSES AS FOLLOWS: 
1. That in pursuance of this agreement, the Vendor has already received from the V endee a 
sum of Rs. 2,00,000/0 (Rupees two lacs only) as part sale consideration, the receipt of which 
the Vendor hereby admit and acknowledge.  
2. The balance amount of Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) has been paid by th e 
Vendee to the Vendor by cheque No. 010806 dated 29.9.86 drawn on Central Bank of India, 
Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019. 
 110  
3. That is view of the amount of sale consideration received, the Vendor   hereby grant, 
convey and transfer all his rights, titles and interests as held on the date hereof in the sa id part 
of basement and part of First Floor of the said property together with undivided, indivisible 
and impartible proportionate ownership rights on the land underneath the said building, o n 
the terms and conditions contained herein, provided that common staircase, water tanks and 
other common facilities, fittings etc. shall be used and enjoyed by the Vendee alongwith other 
owners/occupants of the said building. 
4. That the Vendor is free to sell the remaining portion (s) of the said resid ential building to 
any other party/parties with common rights for use of common entrances, common passages, 
staircases, water tanks, common facilities etc. and the Vendee will not ma ke any objection 
thereto. 
5. That the Vendor assures that the sale of the said residential portion/domesti c storage 
space is free from attachment, tenancies gifts, decree, prior sale and religious di sputes and if 
it is proved otherwise at any time and the Vendee suffers any loss due to any of t he 
aforementioned reasons, then the Vendor shall be liable to make good the loss thus suffer ed 
by the Vendee. 
6. That the Vendee has perused the original title deed, sanctioned plans. Sale plans  etc. and 
has fully satisfied herself. 
7. That the Vendee/occupants shall have no right to use or affix or exhibit any displ ay 
boards or any big writing or any sing boards at the external face of the said building. 
8. That all expenses of registration, Corporation tax etc. have been borne and pa id by the 
Vendee. 
9. That charges for maintenance/consumption for common amenities such as lights i n 
staircases etc. and booster and charges for major repairs etc. shall be paid by the owners of all 
the portions proportionately. 
10. That all taxes from the date of the Agreement to sell the said portion shall be borne and 
paid by the Vendee. If assessment of taxes in not made separately for each portion, t hen all 
the owners of the said building shall pay such charges proportionately directly  to the 
authorities concerned and the Vendor shall in no way be responsible for the same. 
11. That the Vendee shall keep the said property in properly repaired and good condit ion and 
shall not do anything or omit to do anything which may endanger or affect the other portions 
of the said building or hinder the proper and reasonable use of such portions by the other  
owners/occupants of the said building. 
12. That the existing use of the said portion of first floor is residential and t hat on Basement 
domestic storage. The Vendee shall neither use the said portion for any illegal,  immoral or 
commercial purpose nor use it so as to cause annoyance or nuisance to the other 
owners/occupants of the said building. Common parts e.g. staircase, passage, driveway etc. 
will in no case be used for keeping/chaining pets/does or any other animal/b ird or storing 
cycles, scooter, motor-cycles etc. 
13. The Vendee has also satisfied herself about the soundness of the title of the Vendor an d 
his power to sell the said portion in the manner stated herein. 
14. While building is under construction, the Vendee shall have the right to make at her own 
discretion any internal alternations (except structural) in the said porti on at her own cost and 
expenses. 
 111  
15. That the Vendee shall not construct anything whatsoever upon or over hanging the sai d 
land or the portion of the said land kept uncovered and unbuilt upon the building (includi ng 
terrace). The Vendee shall not make any alterations involving structural changes in the said 
protion/building. The Vendee shall have no right to use the terrace at the top of the building . 
16. That the Vendee and owners/occupants (alongwith servants/workmen) of all the portion s 
of the said building will have full right for access to booster pump (tubewel l), water meter, 
sewer tank, overhead water tank etc. at all reasonable times only on notice (except in the case 
of emergency) to get their underground and overhead tanks, booster pump etc. 
repaired/cleaned. 
17. That photostat copies of title deeds etc. have been handed over by the Vendor to t he 
Vendee and physical, vacant possession of the said floor/portion has also been taken by the 
Vendee. 
18. That this transaction has taken place at New Delhi. As such Delhi Court shall hav e 
exclusive jurisdiction to entertain any dispute arising out of or in any way touching or 
concerning this deed. 
 
SCHEDULE OF PROPERTY 
Details of the property to be mentioned. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF parties hereunto have  signed this document on the date and place  
first above written in the presence of following witnesses. 
           
          VENDOR 
           
          VENDEE 
                                                                                       
       
WITNESSES:   (1)          
            (2)               
 
 
*  * *