TRANSFER PETITION UNDER SECTION 25 OF CPC 
Sec 25 of CPC 1908 states that on an application made by a party and after notice to the 
parties and after hearing them the Supreme Court may at any stage if satsfied that such 
a order is needed in the interest of justice may under this section order that any sui t, 
appeal or any other proceeding be transferred from a High Court or other civil court in 
one state to High Court or other civil court in another state. 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION 
TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. _____  OF  2017 
(UNDER SECTION 25 OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, READ WITH  
ORDER XLI, SUPREME COURT RULES, 2013.) 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
J ___________ S/o __________ R/O ________       …PETITIONER 
    VERSUS 
1. Union of India, 
 Through its Secretary, 
 Ministry of Defence, 
 South Block,New Delhi-110001 
2. Chief of Air Staff, 
 Vayu Bhawan, 
 New Delhi-110001. 
3. Air Officer Commanding –in-Chief 
 Western Air Command, 
 Subrato Park,  New Delhi-110010 
4. Group Captan A ______ 
 Station Commander, Air Force 
 Station Suratgarh.  
5. Presiding Officer 
 Court Martial, Subrato Park,New Delhi.    …RESPONDENTS 
 
AND IN THE MATTER OF:  
 TRANSFER OF CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO.727/2015 FILED BY THE 
PETITIONER AGAINST THE RESPONDENTS PENDING IN  THE HIGH COUR T OF 
DELHI AT NEW DELHI, TO THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD.  
To 
The Hon ’ble Chief Justice of India,  
And his Companion Justices of the Hon ’ble Supreme Court of India at New Delhi 
 32    
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the petitioner is seeking Transfer of Civil Writ Petition No.727/201 5 filed by the 
Petitioner against the respondents pending in the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi , to the 
High Court of Judicature of Allahabad, titled “JWO BP Misra Versus Union of India & Ors. ” 
2. BRIEF FACTS: 
i. The Petitioner joined as Airmen in the Trade Flight Mechanic Air Frame and later 
after conversion course became Air Frame Fitter after passing the necessary examinati on and 
training. During the period petitioner also gained a promotion to the rank of Corporal, 
Sergeant and later Junior Warrant Officer – Class-II, a Gazetted post. The Petitioner was also 
awarded three good conduct badge Pay each after 4 year of Services for very good character 
and good proficiency in his trade. There was no whisper of any kind of misconduct whil e 
working at various places during 22 year of service as per the directions of t he Respondents. 
The same is a matter of record and speaks in volumes about the Character and Trade 
proficiency of the petitioner.  
ii. The Petitioner got his last rank after passing due examination and consideration of 
last Annual Confidential Report (ACRS) Significantly in the year 1998 the Peti tioner was 
awarded in assessment 94 / 100 as exceptional which speaks about the high caliber of the 
Petitioner in his trade.  
iii. The Petitioner was compelled to file a Redress of Grievances ROG agains t 
Respondent No.6 for non grant of leave and unwanted harassment in many ways i.e. sending 
on temporary duty assigning Secondary Duties, not granting of leave and denial of even 
monthly salary for four months which is a matter of record. The Petitioner has one son 
suffering with asthmatic problem and came on posting to present place as per the Medica l 
advice of the authorities. 
iv. The Petitioner was charge sheeted and later the same was dropped as he has 
complained about the grievances against his Squadron Technical Officer (STO) for  illegal 
harassment. 
v. The petitioner has all the apprehensions of his life as such filed a FIR at the P olice 
Station for seeking protection from the officials of the Respondents. The Secur ity Officer of 
the Respondents gave undertaking before the Police on behalf of Respondents that no harm 
will be done to the Petitioner. After withdrawing the Complaint by the Petitioner , the 
Petitioner was immediately sent on temporary duty to Nalia in Gujarat due to irritation of 
complaint. The Petitioner had no alternative but to proceed as directed without bei ng his turn. 
The harassment of the Petitioner continued at the behest of the Respondent No.6 
Commanding Officer C.O. and his Subordinates. After strong and heavy earth quake in whol e 
of the Gujarat in the morning the Petitioner was directed to go back to his Uni t knowing fully 
well of non-availability of transport which was totally abandoned due to the ear th quake, the 
same is matter of record. However the Petitioner has to beg for his food and som ehow 
reached his unit to avoid wrath of the Respondents by way of disciplinary action f or mis-
conduct of not disobedience. 
 33    
vi. The Petitioner aggrieved by such highhandedness of the Respondents filed an Appea l 
under 26 of Air Force Act for redressal of his grievances. The Petitioner gav e a reminder for 
disposal of his appeal under Section 26 of the Air Force Act. The Appeal was rejected without 
speaking order with stereo type of order devoid of merits. The Petitioner fi led application for 
permission to file Civil Case and for grant of leave. The same was not granted by the 
Respondents and even denied the acknowledgment of the receipt. Application for extension of 
service was rejected and ordered to be discharged. The Petitioner was orally threatene d to 
abstain from raising such applications.  
vii. The Petitioner was put under Close arrest without informing his family as even 
directed by the Hon ’ble Supreme Court in D.K. Basu ’s case, which curtails the liberty of the 
Petitioner in a illegal manner. The reasons are yet to be known. The Petitioner  sought 
interview with the Station Commander which was granted later on 9.10.2001. The Station 
Commander instead of redressing of the grievance and consoling the Petitioner fo r his illegal 
close arrest, further threatened the Petitioner with a dire consequence and of fu rther putting 
him under close arrest and threatened for Court Martial. 
viii. The Petitioners Summary of Evidence 2nd is completed in an illegal manner 
without providing him a copy of the previous Summary of Evidence which is mandatory to 
meet the requirements of principles of Natural Justice. The petitioner i s now informed that he 
is likely to Court martialled by way of GCM. and  since last 4 months the Peti tioner is under 
constant threat of disciplinary action at the hands of the Respondents for no f ault of his where 
as all officials under the Respondents have joined hands together to harass the Pet itioner by 
all means and make example case for others. The Petitioners extension application is also 
rejected as the last Respondent has spoiled his ACR for the year 2003 and 2005 without any 
communication to the Petitioner or in a Counseling to the Petitioner as prov ided under the 
provisions of the Air Force Act. Hence Writ Petition No.727 of 2015 filed for  ini tiation of 
appropriate enquiry and disciplinary action against the officials for illegal ha rassment of the 
Petitioner and for quashing of the ACRs 2003 & 2005 and subsequent order of discharge. 
ix. Respondents decided to conduct General Court Martial in retaliation to  certain 
observations and queries by this Hon ’ble Court to explain the reason of close arrest in 
September, 2014. That no legal aid or defence Advocate was provided. All members were 
ignorant about law and worked at the tune of the Judge Advocate and all pleas of pet itioner 
were disallowed in arbitrary manner. Preliminary objections were not taken by General Court 
Martial on record. The Petitioner approached Hon ’ble High Court of Delhi by way of Civil 
Misc. Application in which notice was issued. General Court Martial without  adhering to law 
and provisions and principles of natural justice passed the order, “to be reduced to the rank of 
Cpl. From JWO (JCO) subject to confirmation. ” The copy of the order was not given to the 
Petitioner to deprive him to approach this Hon ’ble Court. The Petitioner was released form 
open arrest which speaks in volumes about the high-handedness of the Respondents to 
deprive him of any legal aid or counseling by any one.  Proceeding copy of General Court  
Martial were denied to the Petitioner by which denied the statutory right of Appeal u/s 161 (1) 
of Air Force Act. Even affidavit of defence witness was not taken on record.  
x. The Petitioner was discharged. Pension stopped. Regular threat to life is given as 
numerous incidents of elimination of Airmen who raise voice against commissioned officers. 
 34    
The Petitioner is in bad financial state and has no money to meet his day to day expenses. The 
petitioner has no means to incur heavy expenditure in travelling to Delhi fo r conduct of his 
case. The petitioner also feels that his life will be put to an end by  the respondents. Fearing 
safety of his life the petitioner has moved his family bag and baggage to Distri ct Pratap Garh 
(U.P.). That the High Court of judicature at Allahabad are near to the place of residence  of the 
petitioner and the petitioner feels that the writ Petition No. 727 of 2015 ti tled B.P. Mishra V/s 
U.O.I. be transferred to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad as the peti tioner has no 
trust and faith in the respondent and they can stoop to any level and the petitioner fears for his 
life. Hence the petitioner is seeking transfer of his  case to the High Court at Allahabad. 
3. This Transfer Petition is being filed by the Petitioner for transferri ng the Civil Writ 
Petition No.727/2015 filed by the Petitioner at the High Court of Delhi at N ew Delhi on 
amongst others the following grounds. 
GROUNDS 
I. Because the Petitioners have no trust and faith in the respondents as they are 
prejudiced and using influence and every other illegal method to defeat the  petitioner. Thus 
the petitioner is seeking the transfer of the case from the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi to 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. 
II. Because the petitioner have no trust and faith in Opposite party as they had in past 
acted with malice and making life threatening attempts and petitioner fears for  his and of his 
family’s life. 
III. Because the petitioner is discharged from service and is not getting Pensi on and dues 
and petitioner is reduced in state of penury and is not in a position to conduct case in Delhi. 
IV. Because on 31.5.2015 the Petitioner was discharged. His pension stopped and he 
received regular threat to life is given as numerous incidents of elimination of Airmen who 
raise voice against commissioned officers.  
V. Because the Petitioner is in bad financial state and has no money to meet his day t o 
day expenses. The petitioner has no means to incur heavy expenditure in travelling to Delhi 
for conduct of his case. The petitioner also feels that his life will be put to an end by the 
respondents. Fearing safety of his life the petitioner has moved his family bag  and baggage to 
District Pratapgarh (U.P.). That the High Court of judicature at Allahabad a re near to the 
place of residence of the petitioner and the petitioner feels that the wri t Petition No. 727 of 
2015 titled B.P. Mishra V/s U.O.I. be transferred to the High Court of Judicature a t Allahabad 
as the petitioner has no trust and faith in the respondent and they can stoop to any lev el and 
the petitioner fears for his life.  
VI. Because in the facts and circumstances stated above, it would be in the i nterest of 
justice that the said Civil Writ Petition No. 727/2015 filed by the petiti oner against the 
respondents pending in the High court of Delhi at New Delhi be transferred to  High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad (U.P.). Even otherwise there is no likelihood of disposal of writ 
petition No. 727/2015 due to heavy back log of cases. The copy of the civil writ peti tion 
No.727 / 2015 is Annexure P-1. 
4. That the petitioner has not filed any other similar transfer petition  before this Hon ’ble 
Court so far in respect of this matter.  
 35    
PRAYER: 
In view of the above facts and circumstances, it is respectfully submitted that this Hon’ble 
Court may be pleased:  
a) To pass order for transfer of the Civil Writ Petition No. 727/2015 filed by the 
Petitioner against the respondent titled “JWO BP Mishra Vs. Union of India ” from High 
Court Delhi at New Delhi to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. 
b) Any other and further order as may be deemed fit and proper may also be passed. 
 
         FILED BY: 
 
DATE OF DRAWN _______________  
DATE OF FILING             ADVOCATE FOR THE PETITIONER 
NEW DELHI 
 
[NOTE : To be supported by an affidavit] 
* * *