THIS IS THE LAST WILL TESTAMENT of me, Sh. XYZ S/o Sh. ABC R/O 13, PQS 
APPARTMENTS, ROHINI, DELHI- 110085 made at….(Place) on….(Date).  
That life is uncertain and this is my last Will by way of which I bequeat h voluntarily and out 
of my own free will in a sound state of mind, my self acquired properties to the beneficiaries 
as described hereunder. 
 
WHEREAS I was married to…..(name) on….(date) and is living happily for …. Years  and 
out of the wedlock we have two children, a son …….(name) aged… and a daughter  …… 
aged…..  
AND WHEREAS ….. my son is happily married to….(name) and out of the wedlock, they 
are blessed with one child….. (name) aged…. and are residing at ……(address).  
AND WHEREAS ……my daughter is married to…(name) and out of the wedlock they are  
blessed with one child….(name) aged… and are residing at…(address).  
 
In my lifetime I have built my movable and immovable properties out of my own sources and, 
therefore, I am the absolute owner of the properties hereunder. 
IMMOVABLE PROPERTY 
1. Residential property bearing no. ………….admeasuring …………...  
2. Residential property bearing no……….admeasuring………….  
  (hereinafter called the Immovable Property) 
MOVABLE PROPERTY 
All my household and personal belongings at ………..  
FD’s if any 
Gold Details etc. 
(hereinafter called the Movable Property) 
 
I HEREBY WISH that my abovementioned property should devolve in the following manner: 
That my property bearing no………would devolve on to my wife….absolutely and 
unconditionally and she shall deal with the said property in any manner as she lik es and my 
children will have no claim on this property whatsoever. 
That my property bearing no…… and my all movable property would devolve on to my 
son….. absolutely and unconditionally and none of my legal heirs shall have any claims on 
this property whatsoever. 
That my daughter is happily married and is well settled in her matrimonial home and she does 
not need any financial support for survival after my death.  
That my present will is drafted in my presence and upon my instructions and conten ts of my 
will have been read out to me in my own vernacular.   
I declare the contents of this Will to be my last Will arrived at by me in sound state of mind. 
 
IN WITNESSES WHEREOF I….. have signed this will hereunder on this ….Day of …., 
20...at…in t he presence of the following witnesses who are also attesting this will in m y 
 102  
presence and at my request.        
        Sign 
TESTATOR 
 
Signed by the above named testator in our presence at the same time and each of us has in th e 
presence of the testator signed our name hereunder as an attesting witness 
 
1. Name and details of Witness 1      Sign 
2. Name and details of Witness 2      Sign 
* * *