MODEL DRAFT FOR WRITTEN STATEMENT  
IN THE COURT OF SHRI ……………… CIVIL JUDGE  
(DISTRICT __________), DELHI 
SUIT NO. ……………………OF    2017 
 
X_______________                                            … PLAINTIFF  
VERSUS  
Y_________________                         …..DEFENDANT 
WRITTEN STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANT  
 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
 
PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS : 
 1. That the suit is barred by limitation under Article .......... of the Limitat ion Act and 
is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. 
 2. That this Hon ’ble Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and try this suit 
because..................... 
 3. That the suit has not been properly valued for the purpose of court fees and jur isdiction 
and is therefore liable to rejected outrightly. 
 4. That there is absolutely no cause of action in favour of the Plaintiff and ag ianst the 
Defendant. The suit is therefore liable to be rejected on this ground also.  
 5. That the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties, namely .......................... 
 6. That the suit is bad for mis-joinder of Z. 
 7. That the suit is barred by the decree dated ................... passed in suit No....................... 
titled Y Versus X by Sh. ..........................., Sub-Judge, Delhi, The present suit is therefore   
barred by the principle of res-judicata and therefore liable to be dismissed on thi s short 
ground alone.  
 8. That the suit is liable to be stayed as a previously instituted suit betw een the parties 
bearing No.................. is pending in the Court of Sh. ......................., Sub-Judge, Delhi 
 9. That the suit has not been properly verified in accordance with law.  
 10. That the Plaintiff ’s suit for permanent injunction is barred by Section 41 (h) of the 
Specific Relief Act since a more efficacious remedy is available to the Plaint iff. The Plaintiff 
has alleged breach of contract by the Defendant. Assuming, though not admitting, that the 
Defendant has committed any alleged breach, the remedy available to the Plaintiff i s by way 
of the suit for specific performance. 
 11. That the Plaintiff ’s suit for permanent injunction is also barred by Section 41 (i) of the 
Specific Relief Act because he has not approached this Hon ’ble Court with clean hands and 
his conduct has been most unfair, dishonest and tainted with illegalit y. 
 28    
 12. That the Plaintiff ’s suit for declaration is barred by Section 34 of the Special Relief 
Act as the plaintiff has omitted to claim further consequential relief available t o him.  
 13. That the suit is barred by Section 14 of the Specific Relief Act as the contract  of 
personal service cannot be enforced. 
 14. That the suit is liable to be dismissed outrightly as the Plaintiff has not given the 
mandatory notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure/Section 14 (1) (a)  Rent 
Control Act/Section 478 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act. 
 15. That the suit is liable to be dismissed as the Plaintiff firm is not regi stered under 
Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act and as such is not competent to institute this suit.  
 16. That the present suit is barred by Section 4 of the Benami Transaction  (Prohibition) 
Act, 1988, and is therefore liable to be dismissed outrightly. 
ON MERITS  :  
Without prejudice to the preliminary objections stated above, the reply on merits, w hich is 
without prejudice to one another, is as under:- 
 1. That the contents of para 1 of the plaint is correct and is admitted. 
2. That the contents of para 2 of the plaint are denied for want of knowledge. T he Plaintiff be 
put to the strict proof of each and every allegation made in the para under reply.  
3. That the contents of para 3 of the plaint are absolutely incorrect and are denie d. It is 
specifically denied that the Plaintiff is the owner of the suit property. A s a matter of fact, Mr. 
N is the owner of the suit propert y. 
4. That with respect to para 4 of the plaint, it is correct that the Defendant i s in possession of 
the suit property. However, the remaining contents of para under reply are absolutel y 
incorrect and are denied. It is specifically denied that...................... 
5-10. (Each and every allegation must be replied specifically depending upon the facts of 
each case. The above reply on merits is therefore only illustrative in nature.)  
11. That para 11 of the plaint is incorrect and is denied. There is no cause of action in favour 
of the Plaintiff and against the Defendant because....................... The plaintiff is ther efore 
liable to be rejected outrightly.  
12. That the contents of para 21 is not admitted. This Hon ’ble Court has no jurisdiction to 
entertain this suit because the subject matter of this suit exceeds the pec uniary jurisdiction of 
this Hon ’ble Court. 
13. The the contents of para 13 is not admitted. The suit has not been properly valued for t he 
purpose of court fee and jurisdiction. According to the Defendant the correct v aluation of the 
suit is Rs...................  
 
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to: 
a) Dismiss the suit of the plaintiff. 
b) Award costs to the defendant. 
 29    
c) Pass any other just and equitable order as deemed fit in the interest of justice. 
DEFENDANT 
Delhi        THROUGH  
Dated                               ADVOCATE 
VERIFICATION :  
Verified at Delhi on … day….. of , 20… that the contents of paras  1 to …. Of the preliminary 
objection and para…to… of reply on merits are true to my personal knowledge and those of 
paras … to ….of preliminary objection and para…to… of reply on merits are true & corr ect 
on the basis of legal advice received and belived to be true. Last para is prayer to the Hon ’ble 
Court. 
 
 
DEFENDANT 
 
 
[NOTE :  Counter Claim, Set off can be joined in the Written Statement and the same may be 
verified and supported by affidavit] 
  
* * *