WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO.______ OF 2016 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
Mr._____ 
S/o Sh. ______, 
R/o ______                                …..Petitioner  
 
                                                    Versus 
1. Union of India, 
 Through  
 Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 Ministry of Finance,  
 Department of Revenue, 
 North Block, New Delhi-11001  
 
2. The Joint Secretary (PITNDPS), 
 to the Government of India, 
 Ministry of Finance, 
 Department of Revenue, 
 Room No.26, Church Road, 
 R.F.A. Barracks, 
 New Delhi -110001 
 
3. Director General,  
 Directorate of Revenue Intelligence 
 Delhi Zonal Unit, B-3 & 4, 6th Floor, 
 Paryavaran Bhavan, CGO Complex,  
 Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110003         …..Respondents  
  
PETITION UNDER ARTICLE 226 AND 227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
READ WITH SECTION 482 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
SEEKING ISSUANCE OF A WRIT OF MANDAMUS AND/OR ANY OTHER 
APPROPRIATE WRIT, ORDER AND/OR DIRECTION IN THE NATURE 
THEREOF, THEREBY DIRECTING THE RESPONDENTS TO PLACE ON 
RECORD THE DETENTION ORDER DATED 10.09.2013 PASSED IN RESPECT OF 
THE PETITIONER ISSUED UNDER SECTION 3(1) OF THE PREVENTION OF 
ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES 
ACT, 1988 BY THE RESPONDENT NO.2, ALONGWITH GROUNDS OF 
DETENTION AND RELIED UPON DOCUMENTS AND SIMILAR MATERIAL IN 
RESPECT OF OTHER CO-ACCUSED PERSONS AND FURTHER SEEKING 
ISSUANCE OF A WRIT OF CERTIORARI AND/OR ANY OTHER APPROPRIATE 
 64    
WRIT, ORDER AND/OR DIRECTION IN THE NATURE THEREOF, THEREBY 
QUASHING THE SAID DETENTION ORDER PASSED AGAINST THE 
PETITIONER 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH:  
1. That, vide the present petition the petitioner is challenging detention orde r dated 
10.09.2013 issued under section 3(1) of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Dr ugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 by the respondent no.2 against him, in respect of which he 
has recently come to know, when some officials, claiming themselves to be police officials, 
visited his abovementioned premises in the first week of this month for its e xecution. It is 
worth mentioning here that similar detention orders were issued against even other co-accused 
persons, namely X and Y, which have been revoked on the recommendation of the Advisory 
Board, who did not find sufficient grounds for detention of those respective detenus. Copy  of 
such a detention order bearing No. U-11011/1/2012- PITNDPS dated 10.09.2013 qua Mr. X 
is enclosed herewith as Annexure A. Copies of the grounds of detention passed in support of 
that detention order alongwith the list of relied upon documents are also enclosed herewith as 
Annexures B & C respectively.   
2. That the allegations, as revealed from the grounds of detention in respect of his sa id 
co-accused,  are that the petitioner was involved with other accused persons, in the acti vities 
of acquiring, possessing, hoarding, selling and exporting NDPS items. It is respectf ully 
submitted that all the allegations as made in the grounds of detention are false, f rivolous and 
motivated ones, which is also apparent from bare reading of grounds of detention and the 
documents, said to be relied upon at the time of passing the impugned detention order,  since 
even as per those allegations the petitioner has not committed any offence whats oever under 
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (in short Act). It is further 
submitted that in order to falsely implicate the petitioner in the matter  he was forced /coerced 
to make certain involuntary statements under section 67 of the Act, which have been dul y 
retracted. Not only this, it is respectfully submitted that, the petitioner  is made to understand 
that, even other co-accused were forced/coerced to make certain involuntary and i ncorrect 
statements from which even they have retracted at the first available opportunity.  
3. That, the petitioner ’s case is fully covered by the exceptions, as laid down, by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Alka Subhash Gadia ’s case. It is respectfully submitted that 
recently the Hon ’ble Supreme Court in Deepak Bajaj vs. State of Maharashtra, 2010 (4) SCC 
(Cri) 122 has summarized the law on the issue as under:  
(a) Five grounds mentioned in Alka Subhash Gadia case, on which Court can set aside 
detention order at pre-execution stage, are illustrative and not exhaustive. It was also 
reiterated that judgment of a court is not to be read mechanically as a Euclid ’s theorem nor as 
if it were a statute, hence, cannot be constructed as such.  
(b) It was held that entertaining petition against preventive detention order at pr e-execution 
stage should be an exception and not a general rule. However, if a person against whom a 
preventive detention order is passed comes to court at pre-execution stage and satisfies the 
court that such order is clearly illegal, there is no reason why the court should stay its hands 
and compel him to go to jail even though he is bound to be released subsequently because o f 
illegality of such order. If a person, is sent to jail, then even if he is  subsequently released, his 
 65    
reputation may be irreparably tarnished. Liberty of a persona is a precious fundamental right 
under article 21 and should not be lightly transgressed.  
(c) Non-placement of retractions of confessional statement and other relevant mat erial before 
detaining authority vitiates detention order even at pre-execution stage. Hence, on facts, it w as 
held that, as relevant materials were not placed before detaining authority, it v itiated the 
detention order.  
4. That, therefore, under these circumstances, it is respectfully submitted that the 
impugned detention order dated 10.09.2013 is highly illegal and a nullity in the eyes of law 
and the same is liable to be quashed on the following amongst other grounds which are 
without prejudice and in addition to each other.  
 
GROUNDS  
A. Because though the impugned detention order was passed on 10.09.2013, but till date 
the same has not been executed, despite the fact that throughout this period the petitione r was 
available at home and was attending all his daily routine activities. Not only  this, it is further 
respectfully submitted that, the petitioner was regularly appearing before the Trial Court in 
the prosecution proceedings, launched at the instance of the sponsoring authority . It is 
submitted that the long and undue delay in execution of the impugned detention order crea tes 
doubt about the genuineness qua subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority in detaining 
the petitioner preventively. Therefore, in view of the exceptions of the Alka Subhash Gadia ’s 
case the impugned detention order is liable to be quashed. Copies of the relevant order shee t 
of the Trial Court in prosecution proceedings is enclosed herewith as Annexure D.  
B. Because the petitioner says and submits that the alleged incident took place on  
23/24.10.11, however, no detention order was passed till 10.09.13, which clearly shows that 
there has been long and undue delay in passing the impugned detention order, which has 
snatched the nexus between the purpose of detention and the allegations, as made i n the 
grounds of detention. Therefore, it is apparent that the detention order has been passed on 
stale incident and on this ground also the impugned detention order is liable to be quashed, 
more particularly when similar detention orders under similar circumstances have already 
been revoked by the respondent no. 2, on the recommendation of the Advisory Board, who 
did not find sufficient cause for issuance of those detention orders.  
C. Because since the date of the passing of the impugned detention order, which is for a  
period of one year only, the petitioner has not come to the adverse notice of any law enforcing 
authority. Therefore, under these circumstances, purpose of the said detention order has 
already been served and nothing would be achieved by sending the petitioner into custody 
pursuant to the impugned detention order, which was passed about more than 1 ½ year back 
for his detention for a period of one year. It is respectfully submitted that, under  these 
circumstances, purpose of passing the impugned detention order is no more preventive. 
Therefore on this ground also the impugned detention order is liable to be quashed. 
D. Because the petitioner/ detenu is a poor person and has clean antecedents. It is 
respectfully submitted that he is the sole bread earner of his family, which i ncludes his old 
ailing parents, wife and minor children. It is further submitted that grave inju stice has been 
done to the petitioner by executing the impugned detention order, which is even otherwise  
 66    
very draconian in nature, being violative of principles of natural justice. It  is submitted that, 
the impugned detention order is unconstitutional.  
E. It is further respectfully submitted that initiation of mere prosecution proc eedings 
were sufficient to prevent the petitioner from indulging in the alleged p rejudicial activities. 
Therefore, on this ground also the impugned detention order is liable to be quashed. 
F. Because the impugned detention order is not only contrary to the facts of the case but  
also contrary to the settled principles of law. 
 
5. That, the annexures annexed with this petition are true copies of their originals. 
6. That, no similar petition has been filed either before this Hon ’ble Court or any other 
Court including the Hon ’ble Supreme Court of India. 
7. That, the petitioner has no other efficacious remedy other than to file the present 
petition. 
PRAYER: 
In view of foregoing it is most respectfully prayed that: 
(i) a writ of mandamus and/or any other appropriate writ, order and/or direction i n the 
nature thereof may kindly be issued thereby directing the respondents to place on r ecord the 
abovementioned detention order, issued under section 3(1) of the Prevention of Illicit  Traffic 
in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 (in short Act) by the respondent 
no.2 against the petitioner dated 10.09.2013 alongwith the grounds of detention and relied 
upon documents, besides the similar material in respect of other co-accused/ detenus, w ho 
were detained earlier on the same set of facts and circumstances; and 
 (ii) further a writ of certiorari and/or any other appropriate writ , order and/or direction in 
the nature thereof may kindly be issued thereby quashing the abovementioned detention orde r 
dated 10.09.2013, passed by the respondent no.2; and/or 
(iii) any other order, as may be deemed fit and proper under the facts and circumstances of 
the case may also be passed in the matter in favour of the petitioner and against t he 
respondents.  
Petitioner 
New Delhi 
Dated:                                                        Through 
Advocates 
 
  
 67