Page 1 of 48 
 ANTICIPATORY  BAIL   
(U/S 438 CrPC  & 482, BNSS ) 
 
S.S. Upadhyay  
Former District & Sessions Judge/  
Former Addl. Director (Training)  
Institute of Judicial Training & Research, UP, Lucknow.  
Member, Governing Body,  
Chandigarh Judicial Academy, Chandigarh.  
Former Legal Advisor to Governor  
 Raj Bhawan, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow  
Mobile : 9453048988  
E-mail : ssupadhyay28@gmail.com  
Website: lawhelpline.in  
 
 
1. Object of anticipatory bail : Object of anticipatory bail 
provided by Section 438 CrPC is to safeguard the personal 
liberty of the individual and to protect him from the possibility 
of being humiliated and unnecessarily harassed by police by 
taking him into custody. However, a delicate balance is required 
to be established between the right of personal liberty of an 
individual apprehending his arrest and the societal interest. See: 
P.Chidambaram Vs. Directorate of Enforcement, AIR 2019 SC 
4198  
2.1 Court must consider gravity of offence, impact on society 
and need for a fair and free investigation while granting  
anticipatory bail u/s 438 CrPC: The relief of anticipatory bail 
is aimed at safeguarding individual rights. While it serves as a 
crucial tool to prevent the misuse of the power of arrest and 
protects innocent individuals from harassment, it also present s 
challenges in maintaining a delicate balance between individual 
rights and the interests of justice. The tight rope we must walk 
lies in striking a balance between safeguarding individual rights 
and protecting public interest. While the right to liberty and 
Page 2 of 48 
 presumption of innocence are vital, the court must also consider 
the gravity of the offence, the impact on society, and the need 
for a fair and free investigation. The court’s discretion in 
weighing these interests in the facts and circumstances of each 
individual case becomes crucial to ensure a just outcome. See: 
Pratibha Manchanda Vs. State of Haryana, (2023) 8 SCC 181  
2.2 Section 438 CrPC as adopted in UP:  The provision under sub -
section (1) of section 438 under the CrPC and the substituted  
provision as is applicable in Uttar Pradesh are same. The 
provision under sub -section (1 -A) of the Central Act has been 
included verbatim under sub -section (3) of the U.P. 
Amendment. Likewise with respect to the conditions as may be 
imposed at the time of grant of anticipatory bail, both under the 
Central Act and the U.P. Amendment are on similar lines, as 
provided under sub -section (2) of both Acts. But with respect to 
other provisions, included  under sub -section (2), the U.P. 
Amendment additionally provides that the High Court or, as the  
case may be, the Court of Session, at the time of making an 
interim order to grant anticipatory  bail shall indicate the date, on 
which the application for grant of anticipatory bail shall be  
finally heard. Additionally, the explanation appended to sub -
section (2) of U.P. Amendment  provides - "The final order made 
on an application for direction under sub -section  (1); shall  not 
be construed as an interlocutory order for the purpose of this 
Code" . 
2.3 No restriction in UP under BNSS , 2023  to grant anticipatory 
bail for offences punishable with death and life 
imprisonment:  Unlike the bar of Section 438 (6) CrPC, there is 
no restriction in UP u/s 482 of the BNSS, 2023 against the  
Page 3 of 48 
 grant of  anticipatory bail for offences punishable with death 
and/or life imprisonment.  See: Order dated 01.07.2025 passed 
by Justice C.D. Singh of Allahabad High Court in  the case of 
Abdul Hamid Vs. State of UP.  
 
2.1 Power of granting anticipatory bail should be exercised with 
great degree of circumspection:  Power of granting anticipatory bail 
should be exercised with great degree of circumspection. Power to grant 
anticipatory bail u/s 438 CrPC should not be exercised in routine manner. 
See: Tusharbhai Rajnikantbhai Shah Vs Kamal Dayani, ( 2025) 1 SCC 
753 (Paras 65 -69) 
 
2. Section 438 CrPC as amended in Uttarakhand and 
approach of Utt arakhand High Court with regard to 
anticipatory bail: Apprehending  his arrest,  the applicant  
moved  an  application  for anticipatory  bail before  the  learned  
Sessions  Judge,  Udham  Singh  Nagar in connection with FIR 
No. 79 of 2021, registered with Police Station Pulbhatta,  
District Udham Singh Nagar for the offence under Sections 188, 
269, 270, 420 of IPC,  Section 3 of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 
1897 and Section 51 (b) of the Disaster  Management  Act, 2005.  
The learned  Sessions  Judge  vide order  dated  02.09.2021  
rejected  the application  for anticipatory  bail. The  scheme  of the 
Section  438 of the Code  of Criminal  Procedure  is introduced  
by the State  of Uttarakhand  vide Act No. 22/2020.  Section  438 
of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1973  reads  as follows:  
(1) Where  any person  has reason  to believe  that he may be 
arrested  on accusation  of having  committed  a non-bailable  
offence,  he may apply  to the High  Court  or the Court of 
Page 4 of 48 
 Session for a direction under this section that in the event of 
such  arrest  he shall  be released  on bail;  and that Court  may,  
after  taking  into consideration,  inter  alia, the following  factors,  
namely: — 
(i) the nature  and gravity  of the accusation;  
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to 
whether he has  previously undergone imprisonment on 
conviction by a Court in respect of an y cognizable  offence;  
(iii) the possibility  of the applicant  to flee from  justice;  and 
where  the  accusation  has  been  made  with  the  object  
of  injuring  or humiliating  the applicant  by having  him so 
arrested,  either  reject  the  application  forthwith  or issue  
an interim  order  for the grant  of anticipatory  bail:  
Provided that where the High Court or, as the case may be, the 
Court of Session,  has not passed  any interim  order  under  this 
sub-section  or has rejected  the application for grant of 
anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an officer in -charge of a  
police  station  to arrest,  without  warrant,  the applicant  on the 
basis of the accusation  apprehended  in such  application.  
(2) Where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of 
Session, considers it  expedient  to issue  an interim  order  to 
grant  anticipatory  bail under  sub-section  (1), the Court  shall  
indicate  therein  the date,  on which  the application  for grant  of 
anticipatory  bail shall  be finally  heard  for passing  an order  
thereon,  as the Court may deem fit, and if the Court passes any 
order granting anticipatory bail,  such  order  shall  include  inter  
alia the following  conditions,  namely:  
(i) that the applicant shall make himself available for 
Page 5 of 48 
 interrogation by a police  officer  as and when  required;  
(ii) that the applicant  shall  not, directly  or indirectly,  make  
any  inducement,  threat or promise to any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to  dissuade  him 
from  disclosing  such  facts  to the Court  or to any police  
officer;  
(iii) that the applicant  shall  not leave  India  without  the 
previous  permission  of the Court;  and 
(iv) such  other  conditions  as may be imposed  under  
subsection  (3) of section  437.  as if the bail were  granted  
under  that section.  
Explanation : the final  order  made  on an application  for 
directio n under  sub- section (1); shall not be construed as an 
interlocutory order for the purpose of this  Code.  
(3) Where the Court grants an interim order under subsection (l), it 
shall forthwith  cause  a notice  being  not less than seven  days  
notice,  together,  with  a copy  of such  order  to be served  on 
the Public  Prosecutor  and the Superintendent  of Police,  with  
a view  to give the Public  Prosecutor  a reasonable  
opportunity  of being  heard  when  the application  shall  be 
finally  heard  by the Court.  
(4) On the date indicated in the interim order under subsection (2), 
the Court shall  hear the Public Prosecutor and the applicant and 
after due consideration of their  contentions,  it may either  
confirm,  modify  or cancel  the interim  order.  
(5) The High  Court  or the Court  of Session,  as the case may be, 
shall  finally  dispose  of an application for grant of anticipatory 
bail under sub -section (l), within thirty  days  of the date of such  
Page 6 of 48 
 application;  
 Provisions  of this section  shall  not be applicable, - 
(a) to the offences  arising  out of- 
(i) the Unlawful  Activities  (Prevention)  Act, 1967;  
(ii) the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 
1985;  
(iii) the Official Secrets Act, 1923;  
(iv) the Uttarakhand (Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti Social  
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986;) Adaptation and 
Modification Order, 2002  
(v) sub-section(3) of Section 376 or Section 376AB or 
Section 376DA or Section 376DB of the Penal Code, 
1860;  
(vi) chapter 6 of the Penal Code, 1860, viz, offences against 
the state (except Section 129);  
(vii) The Protection  of Children  from  Sexual  Offences  
(POCSO)  Act, 2012;  
(b) in the offences,  in which  death  sentence  may be awarded.  
(6) If an application under this section has been made by any 
person to the High  Court, no application by the same person 
shall be entertained by the Court of  Session.  
 
3. Personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution of India is 
very precious  fundamental  right  and it should  be curtailed  only  
when  it  becomes  imperative  according  to the peculiar  facts  
and circumstances  of the case.  
 
(i) Having considered the submissions of learned counsel for both 
the parties and in  the facts  and circumstances  of the case,  
Page 7 of 48 
 without  expressing  any opinion  as to the merit of the case, 
this court directs that in the event of arrest, the applicant -
accused  Aman  Goyal  shall  be released  on bail on furnishing  
a personal  bond  of Rs. 30,000/ - with  two reliable  sureties,  
each  in the like amount  to the satisfaction  of  the  Investigating  
Officer/Arresting  Officer  with  the following  conditions:  
(ii) The applicant  shall  make  himself  available  at the time  of 
interrogation  by a police  officer  as and when  requires;  
(iii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any 
inducement, threat or  promise  to any person  acquainted  with  
the facts  of the case.  
It is clarified that if the applicant misuses or violates any of 
the conditions,  imposed  upon  him,  the Investigating  Officer  will 
be free to move  the Court  for cancellation  of the interim  
anticipatory  bail. See : Aman Goyal Vs. State of Uttarakhand, 
2021 SCC OnLine Utt 1170  
 
6.1. Guidelines of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court on 
anticipatory bail u/s 438 CrPC as issued in Sushila Aggarwal Vs. 
State, (NCT of Delhi), (2020) 5 SCC 1 (Five -Judge Bench): In 
paragraph 92, the Constitution Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court has 
issued following guidelines  for courts for granting or refusing 
anticipatory bail u/s 438 CrPC:   
 
92.  This Court, in the light of the above discussion in the two 
judgments, and in the light of the answers to the reference, hereby 
clarifies that the following need to be kept in mind by courts, 
dealing with applications under Section 438 CrPC:  
 
92.1.  Consistent with the judgment in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia vs. State of 
Punjab, when a person complains of apprehension of arrest and 
approaches for order, the application should be based on concrete 
facts (and not vague or general allegations) reliable to one or other 
specific offence. The application seeking anticipatory bail should 
contain bare essential facts relating to the offence, and why the 
Page 8 of 48 
 applicant reasonably apprehends arrest, as well as his side of the 
story. These are essential for the court which should consider his 
application, to evaluate the threat or apprehension, its gravity or 
seriousness and the appropriateness of any condition that may have 
to be imposed. It is not essential that an application should be 
moved only after an FIR is filed; it can be moved earlier, so long as 
the facts are clear and there is reasonable basis for apprehending 
arrest.  
 
92.2.  It may b be advisable for the court, which is approached with an 
application under Section 438, depending on the seriousness of the 
threat (of arrest) to issue notice to the Public Prosecutor and obtain 
facts, even while granting limited interim anticipatory bail.  
 
92.3.  Nothing in Section 438 CrPC, compels or obliges courts to impose, 
conditions limiting relief in terms of time, or upon filing of FIR, or 
recording of statement of any witness, by the police, during 
investigation or inquiry, et While considering an application (for 
grant of anticipatory bail) the spurt has to consider the nature of the 
offence, the role of the person, the likelihood of his influencing the 
course of investigation, or tampering with evidence (including 
intimidating witnesses), likelihood of fleeing justice (such leaving 
the country), etc. The courts would be justified and ought to 
impose conditions spelt out in Section 437(3) CrPC [by virtue of 
Section 438(2)]. The need to impose other restrictive conditions, 
would have to be judged on a case -by-case basis, and depending 
upon the materials produced by the State or the investigating 
agency. Such special or other restrictive conditions may be 
imposed if the case or cases warrant, but should not be imposed in 
a routine manner, in all cases. Likewise, conditions which limit the 
grant of anticipatory bail may be granted, if they are required in the 
facts of any case or cases; however, such limiting conditions may 
not be invariably imposed.  
 
92.4.  Courts ought to be generally guided by considerations such as the 
nature and gravity of the offences, the role attributed to the 
applicant, and the facts of the case, while considering whether to 
grant anticipatory bail, or refuse it. Whether to grant or not is a 
matter of discretion equally whether and if so, what kind of special 
conditions are to be imposed (or not imposed) are dependent on 
facts of the case, and subject to the discretion of the court.  
 
Page 9 of 48 
 92.5.  Anticipatory bail granted can, depending on the conduct and 
behaviour  of the accused, continue after filing of the charge -sheet 
fill end of trial.  
 
92.6.  An order of anticipatory bail should not be blanket in the sense that 
it should not enable the accused to commit further offences and 
claim relief of indefinite protection on arrest. It should be confined 
to the offence or incident, for which apprehension of arrest sought, 
in relation to a specific incident. It cannot operate in respect of a 
future incident that involves commission of an offence.  
 
92.7.  An order of anticipatory bail does not in any manner limit or 
restrict the rights or duties of the police or investigating agency, to 
investigate into the charges against the person who seeks and is 
granted pre -arrest bail.  
 
92.8.  The observations in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia vs. State of Punjab, 
(1980) 2 SCC 565 regarding limited custody or "deemed custody" 
to facilitate the requirements the investigative authority, would be 
sufficient for the purpose of fulfilling the provisions of Section 27, 
in the event of recovery of an article, of discovery of a fact, which 
is relatable to a statement made during such even (i.e. deemed 
custody). In such event, there is no question for necessity of asking 
the accused to separately surrender and seek regular bail. Sibbia 
had observed that: (SCC p. 584, para 19).  
 
19. if and when the occasion arises, it may be possible for the 
prosecution to claim the benefit of Section 27 of the Evidence Act 
in regard to a discovery of facts made in pursuance of information 
supplied by a person released on bail by invoking the principle 
stated by this Court in State of U.P. vs. Deoman Upadhyaya.  
 
92.9.  It is open to the police or the investigating agency to move the 
court concerned, which grants anticipatory bail, for a direction 
under Section 439(2) to arrest the accused, in the event of violation 
of any term, such as absconding non -cooperating during 
investigation, evasion, intimidation or inducement witnesses with a 
view to influence outcome of the investigation or trial, etc.  
 
92.10.  The court referred to in para 92.9 above is the court which 
grants anticipatory bail, in the first instance, according to 
prevailing authorities.  
 
Page 10 of 48 
 92.11. The correctness of an order granting bail, can be considered by the 
appellate or superior court at the behest of the State or investigating 
agency, and set aside on the ground that the court granting it did 
not consider material facts or crucial circumstances. (See: Prakash 
Kadam vs. Ramprasad Viswanath Gupta: Jai Prakash Singh: State 
of U.P. vs. Amarmani Tripathi.) This does not amount to 
"cancellation" in terms of Section 439(2) CrPC.  
 
92.12.  The observations in Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre vs. State of 
Maharashtra (and other similar judgments) that no restrictive 
conditions at all can be imposed, while granting anticipatory bail 
are hereby overruled. Likewise, the decision in Salauddin 
Abdulsamad Shaikh vs. State of Maharashtra and subsequent 
decisions (including K.L. Verma vs. State, Sunita Devi vs. State of 
Bihar, Adri Dharan Das vs. State of W.B., Nirmal Jeet Kaur vs. 
State of M.P, HDFC Bank Ltd. vs. J.J. Mannan Satpal Single, State 
of Punjab and Naresh Kumar Yadav v. Ravindra Kumar) which lay 
down such restrictive conditions, or terms limiting the grant of 
anticipatory bail to a period of time are hereby overruled. See: 
Sushila Aggarwal Vs. State, (NCT of Delhi), (2020) 5 SCC 1 
(Five -Judge Bench).  
 
 
6.2 Law declared by Constitution Bench  on anticipatory bail u/s 
438 CrPC : A Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court  
while considering all the previous leading decisions of the 
Supreme Court  has clarified the scope of grant or refusal of 
anticipatory bails by courts u/s 438 of CrPC as under:  
(1) Consistent with the judgment in when a person complains of 
apprehension of arrest and approaches for order, the 
application should be based on concrete facts (and not vague or 
general allegations) relatable to one or other specific offence. 
The application seeking anticipatory bail should contain bare 
essential facts relating to the offence, and why the applicant 
reasonable apprehends arrest, as well as his side of the story 
These are essential for the court which should consider his 
Page 11 of 48 
 application, to evaluate the threat or apprehension, its gravity 
or seriousness and the appropriateness of any condition that 
may have to be imposed. It is not essential that an application 
should be moved only after an FIR is filed; it can be moved 
earlier, so long as the facts are clear and there is reasonable 
basis for apprehending arrest.  
(2) At the time of granting limited interim anticipatory bail 
depending on the seriousness of the threat of arrest, it is not 
advisable to issue notice to the public prosecutor.  
(3) While considering the application for grant of anticipatory bail 
the court has to consider the nature of the offence, the role of 
the person, the likelihood of his influencing the course of 
investigation, or tampering with evidence (including 
intimidating witnesses), likelihood of fleeing justice (such as 
leaving the country), etc. The courts would be justified - and 
ought to impose conditions spelt out in Section 437 (3) CrPC. 
Other restrictive conditions may also be imposed if the case or 
cases warrant but should not be imposed in routine manner, in 
all cases.  
(4) Whether to grant or not to grant the anticipatory bail is a matter 
of discretion; equally the imposition of special conditions are 
dependent on facts of the case, and subject to the discretion of 
the court.  
(5) Anticipatory bail granted can, depending on the conduct and 
behavior  of the accused, continue after filing of the charge 
sheet till end of trial.  
(6) An order of anticipatory bail should not be "blanket" in the 
sense that it should not enable the accused to commit further 
Page 12 of 48 
 offences and claim relief of indefinite protection from arrest. It 
should be confined to the offence or incident, for which 
apprehension of arrest is sought, in relation to a specific 
incident.  
(7) An order of anticipatory bail does not in any manner limit or 
restrict the rights or duties of the police or investigating 
agency, to investigate into the charges against the person who 
seeks and is granted pre -arrest bail.  
(8) The observations in Sibbia regarding "limited custody" or 
"deemed custody" to facilitate the requirements of the 
investigative authority, would be sufficient for the purpose of 
fulfilling the provisions of Section 27, in the event of recovery 
of an article, or discovery of a fact, which is relatable to a 
statement made during such event (i.e. deemed custody). In 
such event, there is no question (or necessity) of asking the 
accused to separately surrender and seek regular bail. Sibbia 
(supra) had observed that "if and when the occasion arises, it 
may be possible for the prosecution to claim the benefit of 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act in regard to a discovery of facts 
made in pursuance of information supplied by a person 
released on bail by invoking the principle stated by this Court. 
See: State of U.P. Vs. Deoman Upadhyaya, AIR 1960 SC 
1125.  
(9) It is open to the police or the investigating agency to move the 
court which grants anticipatory bail, for a direction u/s 439 (2) 
to arrest the accused in the event of violation of any term, such 
as absconding, non -cooperative during investigation, evasion, 
intimidation or inducement to witnesses with a view to 
influence outcome of investigation or trial, etc.  
Page 13 of 48 
 (10) The correctness of an order granting bail, can be considered 
and set aside if necessary by the appellate court on the ground 
that the court granting it did not consider material facts or 
crucial circumstances.  
(11) It has been observed that no restrictive conditions at all can be 
imposed, while granting anticipatory bail has been overruled. 
Likewise, the decision in Salauddin Sheikh and subsequent 
decisions, which lay down such restrictive conditions, or terms 
limiting the grant of anticipatory bail, to a period of time have 
also been overruled. See: Sushila Aggarwal Vs State (NCT of 
Delhi), AIR 2020 SC 831 (Five -Judge Bench)  
 
6.3 Relevant considerations for grant or refusal of anticipatory bail u/s 
438 CrPC: The relevant considerations for grant or refusal of 
anticipatory bail u/s 438 CrPC to an individual apprehending 
his arrest are as under:  
(1) The limitations u/s 437 CrPC is not applicable to the grant of 
anticipatory bail u/s 438 CrPC.  
(2) On the other hand, the object of using the words 'if it thinks fit' 
in section 438 (1) CrPC, which are absent in section 437 (1) 
CrPC, is to  confer a wide discretion on the High Court and the 
Sessions Court to grant anticipatory bail because - (a) it would 
be difficult to enumerate the conditions under which 
anticipatory bail should or should not be granted; and (b) the 
intention was to give the higher courts a somewhat free hand in 
the grant of relief in the nature of anticipatory bail. See: 
Gurubaksh Singh Sibba Vs. State of Punjab, AIR 1980 SC 
1632  
(3) It is also for the petitioner to substantiate prima facie that the 
charge of serious non - bailable offence is groundless or that it 
has been leveled against him mala fide, e.g., for humiliating 
him. See: Gurubaksh Singh Sibba Vs. State of Punjab, AIR 
1980 SC 1632  
(4) Anticipatory bail cannot be denied merely on the ground that 
the investigation is yet not complete or that the name of the 
petitioner has not been mentioned in the FIR. See: Jagan Vs. 
Page 14 of 48 
 State of M.P. (1978) Cr LJ (NOC) 256 (MP)  
(5) Anticipatory bail should be granted as a rule if it is used to 
oppress the political opponents or where there is no specific act 
attributed to the accused. See: Narinder Vs. State, (1977) CrLJ  
596 (P & H)  
(6) The power of anticipatory bail exercisable u/s 438 CrPC is 
somewhat extra -ordinary and it is only in exceptional cases 
that it can be used when it appears that the person may be 
falsely implicated in the offence or where there are reasonable 
grounds for believing that it is not likely to be misused. See: 
Adri Dharan Das Vs. State of W.B., AIR 2005 SC 1057 and 
D.K. Ganesh Babu Vs. P.T. Manokaran, (2007) 4 SCC 434  
(7) The provision of section 438 CrPC should not be applied 
mechanically and anticipatory bail should not be granted in 
every case by mere asking of the accused. See: Suresh Vs 
State, 1958 CrLj 1750 (Rajasthan)  
(8) An anticipatory bail intrudes in the sphere of investigation of 
crime. Some very compelling circumstances have to be made 
out for grant of anticipatory bail to the accused involved in 
serious offences. See: Pokar Ram Vs. State, AIR 1985 SC 969  
(9) It is obligatory for the court to hear the Public Prosecutor 
before granting anticipatory bail finally, even though at initial 
stage interim order may be passed without hearing the Public 
Prosecutor.  
(10) Reasons must be recorded, though briefly, as to why the 
anticipatory bail was being granted. See: State of Maharashtra 
Vs. Viswas, (1978) CrLj 1403 (Bombay) (DB).  
6.4 Relevant considerations for grant of bail and anticipatory bail 
Page 15 of 48 
 u/s 438 CrPC:  The factors to be taken into consideration , while 
condsidering an application for bail  of the particular an application for 
bail are the nature of accusation and the severity of the punishment in 
the case of conviction and the nature of the materials  relied upon by the 
prosecution,  reasonable apprehension of tampering with the witness or 
apprehension of threat to the complainant or the time of trail or the 
likelihood of his abscondence,  Character, behavi our and standing of the 
accused,  and the c ircumstances which are peculiar  to the accused and 
larger interest of the public or the State and similar other  considerations. 
A Criminal court, exercising jurisdiction to grant bail/anticipatory bail, 
is not expected to act as a recovery agent to realize the dues o f the 
complainant, and that too without any tria l. See:  
(i) Ramesh Kumar Vs. State NCT Delhi (2023) 7  SCC 461  (Para 23)    
(ii) Dilip Singh Vs. State of M.P, (2021) 2 SCC 779 (Para 4)  
 
6.4  Depositing cheated money as condition for grant of anticipatory 
bail u/s 438 CrPC cannot be imposed: Inclusion of a condition for 
payment of money by the accused for bail tends to create an impression 
that bail could be secured by depositing money alleged to have been 
cheated. That is really not the purpose and intent of the provisions for 
grant of bail.  See: Ramesh Kumar Vs. State NCT of Delhi, (2023) 7 
SCC 461 (Para 25)   
 
 
6.5 Direction of High Court to cancel sale -deed imposed as pre -
condition for anticipatory bail held improper by Supreme Court:  
The High Court while allowing an application of the accused seeking 
anticipatory bail u/s 438 CrPC directed the accused to comply with 
the Condition No. (iii) with regard to cancellation of the registered 
Page 16 of 48 
 sale deed executed by him and return the money received from the 
complainant. The said condition is reproduced below:  
(iii)“The petitioner/accused shall cooperate in the investigation 
and shall furnish all the registered documents before the 
investigating authorities and he shall take steps to cancel the 
registered sale deeds executed in favour of the vendees within 
two months from today, and shall also return the consideration 
amount received through the said registered sale deeds within 
two months from today, failing which, liberty granted to the 
petitioner shall stand cancelled automatically and he shall be 
taken into custody forthwith.”  
The Supreme Court held that the High Court ought not to have 
imposed the said Condition No. (iii) while granting anticipatory 
bail to the accused as it would tantamount to adversely affect 
the rights of the parties to the registered documents which can 
be adjudicated upon by a Civil Court only. See: Syed Afsar 
Pasha Quadri Vs. State of Telangana, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 
977 
 
6. Caution of Supreme Court regarding grant of bail during 
investigation of crime:  Grant of anticipatory bail at the stage of 
investigation may frustrate the investigating agency in 
interrogating the accused and in collecting the useful 
information and also the materials which might have been 
concealed. Success in such interrogation would elude if the 
accused know that he is protected by the order of the court 
Grant of anticipatory bail, particularly in economic offences 
would definitely hamper the effective i nvestigation. Having 
regard to the materials said to have been collected by the 
Page 17 of 48 
 respondent -Enforcement Directorate and considering the stage 
of the investigation, we are of the view that it is not a fit case to 
grant anticipatory bail See: P.Chidamb aram Vs. E.D., AIR 2019 
SC 4198  
 
7. Long relationship of major female with accused entitled the 
accused to anticipatory bail:  The challenge in the present 
appeal before the Supreme Court was to an order passed by the 
High Court on  19.05.2022  whereby  an application  for pre-
arrest  bail under  Section  438 CrPC for  the offences  under  
Sections  376(2)(n),  377 and 506 IPC was dismissed. It was 
admitted case of the complainant that she was in a relationship 
with the  appellant for a period of four years. In view of the said 
fact, the complainant had willingly been staying with the  
appellant  and had the relationship.  Therefore,  now if the 
relationship  is not working  out, the same cannot be a ground 
for lodging an FIR for the offence under Section 376 (2)(n) 
IPC. The Supreme Court made it clear that the observations in 
the present order would be only for the purposes of deciding 
the pre -arrest bail application. The investigation shall proceed 
uninfluenced by the observations made in the present order. 
See: Ansaar Mohammad Vs. State of Rajasthan and Another, 
2022 SCC OnLine SC 886.  
 
8. Anticipatory bail granted by Uttarakhand High Court for 
offences u/s 304, 201 and 120 -B IPC:  Apprehending his arrest, 
the applicant moved an application under Section 438 CrPC 
seeking anticipatory bail in the event of his arrest in connection 
with Case Crime No. 73 of 2021, registered with Police Station 
Page 18 of 48 
 Joshimath, District Chamoli under Sections 304, 201 and 120 -B 
of IPC. Personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution of 
India is very precious fundamental right and it should be 
curtailed only when it becomes imperative according to the 
peculiar facts and circumstances of the case. Having considered 
the submissions of learned counsel for both the parties and in 
the facts and circumstances of the case, without expressing any 
opinion as to the merit of the case, this court directs that in the 
event of arrest, the applicant -accused Suraj Singh alias Suraj 
Thakur shall be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond 
of Rs. 30,000/ - with two reliable sureties, each in the like 
amount to the satisfaction of the Investigating Officer/Arresting 
Officer with the following conditions:  
(i) The applicant shall make himself available at the time of 
interrogation by a police officer as and when requires;  
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any 
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted 
with the facts of the case.  
I. List on 16.02.2022 for arguments on the application of 
anticipatory bail. Meanwhile, counter affidavit may be filed.  
See: Suraj Singh Vs. State of Uttarakhand, 2022 SCC OnLine 
Utt 65  
 
9. Anticipatory bail granted by Uttarakhand High Court for 
offence u/s 304 -B IPC:  Apprehe nding his arrest, the applicant - 
accused Shiv Lal Arya aged about 60 years had moved an 
application for anticipatory bail before the Sessions Judge, 
Rudraprayag in connection with the FIR No. 32 of 2021 
registered with Police Station Agustmuni, District Rudraprayag 
Page 19 of 48 
 for the offence under Section 304B of IPC. The learned 
Sessions Judge, Rudraprayag vide order dated 10.11.2021 
rejected the said application for anticipatory bail. Present 
application has been filed under Section 438 of the Criminal 
Procedure Code, 1973 seeking anticipatory bail in the event of 
his arrest. Personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution 
of India is very precious fundamental right and it should be 
curtailed only when it becomes imperative according to the 
peculiar facts and circumstances of the case. Having considered 
the submissions of learned counsel for both the parties and in 
the facts and circumstances of the case, this court directs that in 
the event of arrest, the applicant -accused Shiv Lal Arya shall be 
released on bail on furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 30,000/ - 
with two reliable sureties of the same amount, to the satisfaction 
of the Investigating Officer/Arresting Offic er on the following 
conditions:  
The applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by 
the Investigating  Officer as and when requires;  
ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any 
inducement, threat or  promise to any person acquainted with the 
facts of this case.  See: Shiv Lal Arya Vs. State of Uttarakhand, 
2022 SCC OnLine Utt . 842 
 
10. Anticipatory  bail granted by Uttarakhand High Court for 
offence u/s 376, 312, 506 IPC:  Apprehending his arrest, the 
applicant - accused, namely, Shahnoor alias Shanu Arun has 
moved an application for anticipatory bail under Section 438 
CrCP seeking anticipatory bail in the event of his arrest in 
connection with the FIR No. 109 of 2022, registered with Police 
Page 20 of 48 
 Station Pant  Nagar, District Udham Singh Nagar for the offence 
under Sections 376, 312 and 506 of IPC. The learned counsel 
for the applicant further argued that there is no other evidence 
against the present applicant. Personal liberty under Article 21 
of the Constitution of India is very precious fundamental right 
and it should be curtailed only when it becomes imperative 
according to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case. 
Having considered the submissions of learned counsel for both 
the parties and in the facts and circumstances of the case, 
without expressing any opinion as to the merit of the case, this 
court directs that in the event of arrest, the applicant accused 
Shahnoor alias Shanu Arun shall be released on bail on 
furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 30,000/ - with two reliable 
sureties, each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the 
Investigating Officer/Arresting Offic er on the following 
conditions:  
(i) The applicant shall make himself available for interrogation 
by the Investigating Officer as and when requires;  
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any 
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted 
with the facts of this case. See: Shahnoor Vs. State of 
Uttarakhand and Others, 2022 SCC OnLine Utt 897  
 
11. Supreme Court granting anticipatory bail for offence u/s 
306 IPC : Accused had enjoyed the relief of anticipatory bail 
granted by High Court for last more than three and half years 
and then rejected the same. Without making any comments on 
merits of the matter, the Supreme Court set aside the order of 
Page 21 of 48 
 the High Court and granted anticipatory bail to the accused. 
See: Dheeraj Bhadviya Vs. State of Rajasthan, (2022) 6 SCC 63  
 
12. Anticipatory bail cannot be denied to accused solely on 
ground that arrest of accused is necessary as police were 
ready to submit charge -sheet:  Arrest of the accused prior to 
taking charge -sheet on record is not mandatory as per Section 
170 CrPC. Hence, anticipatory bail cannot be denied to accused 
solely on the ground that as police were ready to file charge -
sheet, it was mandatory to arrest the accused, and for that 
reason, anticipatory bail could not be granted. Insistence of trial 
courts on arrest of accused 4 is a pre -requisite to take the 
charge -sheet on record is misplaced and contrary to the very 
intent of Section 170 CrPC. When police submits charge -sheet, 
it is the duty of court to take it on record and consider it in 
accordance with law regardless of whether accused has been 
arrested or not. This would especially be true in cases where 
Section 468 CrPC provides for a limitation period within which 
cognizance of offence must be taken. Section 170 CrPC does 
not impose an obligation on police to arrest each and every 
accused at the time of filing of the charge -sheet and therefore, if 
the IO does not believe that the accused will abscond or disobey 
summons, he need not be produced in custody. See: Siddarth 
Vs. State of U.P., (2022) 1 SCC 676  
13. No absolute bar against grant of anticipat ory bail even if 
accused is a proclaimed offender : There is n o absolute bar 
against grant of anticipat ory bail even if accused is a proclaimed 
offender . See : Order dated 06.01.2026 of Allahabad High Court 
passed in Monika Vs State of UP, 2026 LiveLaw  (AB) 11.  
Page 22 of 48 
 14. Anticipatory bail cannot be sought in complaint case merely 
on issue of process i.e. summons or BW: Anticipatory bail u/s  
482 of the BNSS, 2023 cannot be sought in complaint case 
merely on the issue of summons or BW. See: Ashish Kumar Vs. 
State of UP, 2025 SCC Online Allahabad  4518  
15. Anticipatory bail   normally not to granted after issuance of 
NBW:  Anticipatory bail  normally cannot to granted to accused  
after issuance of NBW . See: 
(i) Ashish Kumar Vs. State of UP, 2025 SCC Online Allahabad  
4518  
(ii) Srikant Upadhyay Vs. State of Bihar, 2024 SCC Online 
SC 282  
16. Anticipatory bail not to granted after issuance of 
proclamation against accused u/s 82 CrPC: Anticipatory bail 
cannot to granted after issuance of proclamation against accused 
u/s 82 CrPC.   
(i) Ashish Kumar Vs. State of UP, 2025 SCC Online Allahabad  
4518  
(ii) Srikant Upadhyay Vs. State of Bihar, 2024 SCC Online SC 
282 
 
17. Anticipatory bail order passed by High Court without 
considering nature of allegations against respective accused 
and their role set aside by Supreme Court:  In the case noted 
below, the Kerala High Court while granting anticipatory bail to 
four accused persons for the offences punishable u/s 120 -B, 167, 
218, 330, 323, 195, 348, 365, 477 -A, 506 IPC had made some 
observations without considering the individual role played by the 
respective accused persons when they were working in the Kerala 
Page 23 of 48 
 Police(IB) and without considering the nature of allegations 
against them. The Supreme Court set aside the anticipatory bail 
granted to the accused persons and remanded the matter to the 
High Court to consider the anticipatory bail applications afresh. 
From the impugned judgments and orders passed by the High 
Court, it appeared that what had weighed with the High Court was 
the FIR that was filed after a number of years after the incident 
having occurred in 1994. However, the High Court had not 
appreciated a t all that the FIR was lodged pursuant to the liberty 
granted by the Supreme Court in the judgment and order passed 
by it in the year 2021 and on the basis of the recommendations 
made by the Committee headed by Hon'ble Mr. Justice D.K. Jain, 
a former Judge of the Supreme Court. Therefore, the High Court 
had failed to appreciate that the present FIR was registered 
pursuant to the observations and the directions issued by the 
Supreme Court. While granting the anticipatory bail to the 
accused persons, the High  Court had neither considered the 
allegations against the respective accused nor the role played by 
them nor the position held by them at the time of registering of the 
FIR in the year 1994 nor the role played by them during the 
investigation of Crime No. 225/1994/246/1994. In view of the 
above, the impugned judgments and orders passed by the High 
Court granting anticipatory bail to the accused persons deserved 
to be quashed and were set aside and the matters were remitted to 
the High Court to consider the anticipatory bail applications 
afresh and thereafter to pass appropriate orders in accordance with 
law and on their own merits and taking into consideration the 
observations made by the Supreme Court. See: Judgment dated 
Page 24 of 48 
 02.12.2022 of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Criminal Appeal No. 
2147 -2149 of 2022 in CBI Vs. P.S. Jayaprakash.  
 
18. Discretionary power of grant of bail u/s 438 CrPC when and 
how to be exercised by courts?:  The Hon'ble Supreme Court 
in deliberating on the various conditions under which the 
discretionary power should be exercised by the appropriate 
court, has laid down the following guidelines:  
(1) The object of anticipatory bail is to protect a person from 
unnecessary harassment or humiliation by the investigating 
agency. On the other hand, if the court intrudes into the sphere 
of investigation of crime without circumspection, faith of the 
public in the administration of justice would be completely 
shaken. Therefore , the court should strike a balance between 
protection of an individual from unnecessary humiliation and 
the faith of the public in the administration of justice.  
(2) Anticipatory Bail is not confined to cases of actual malice. On 
the other hand, status in life, affluence or otherwise of the 
applicant are not relevant considerations u/s  438 CrPC.  
(3) Since anticipatory bail intrudes into the sphere of investigation, 
the court should be circumspect in exercising this power in 
cases where a serious crime is alleged against the applicant.  
(4) In this regard, it is highly relevant to refer to the observations of 
the Constitution Bench, Hon'ble Apex Court held that - "there is 
no offence, per se, which stands excluded from the purview of 
section 438, except the offences mentioned in section 438(4). In 
other words, anticipatory bail can be granted, having regard to 
all the circumstances, in respect of all offences. At the same 
time, if there are indications in any special law or statute, which 
Page 25 of 48 
 exclude relief under section 438(1) they would have to be duly 
considered." The court should exercise the discretion, "having 
regard to the nature of the offences, the facts shown, the 
background of the applicant, the likelihood of his fleeing justice 
(or not fleeing justice); likelihood of cooperation or non -
cooperation with the investigating agency or police etc." The 
court has also observed that the role of the offender, 
circumstances relating to him, his likelihood of subverting 
justice (or fair investigation), are also to be considered and in 
accordance thereto the court may impose special conditions. 
See: Sushila Aggarwal Vs State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2020 SC 
831 
 
19. Presence of accused before court at the time of seeking 
anticipatory bail?:  With respect to the requirement of presence 
of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail, the Central Act, 
makes it obligatory only when an application to that effect as 
per sub -section (1 -B) has been made by the Public Prosecutor 
and the court considers such presence necessary in the interest 
of justice. In this regard, the U.P. Amendment does not make 
any such provision in express terms, rather as per sub -section 
(4), it has been provided "the Court shall hear the Public 
Prosecutor and the Applicant and after due considerations of 
their contentions, it may either confirm, modify or cancel the 
interim order".  
 
20. Presence of accused whether required at the time of hearing 
on application for anticipatory bail?:  While the Central Act 
makes provision under sub -section (3)  of Section 438 CrPC  
Page 26 of 48 
 with respect to the right of the applicant, if he is arrested 
without warrant by an officer -in-charge of a police station on 
such accusation, thereby providing that if the concerned person, 
is prepared to give ball, he shall be re leased on bail. The Central 
Act also makes provision that " if a Magistrate taking 
cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should issue 
in the first instance against that  person, he shall issue a bailable 
warrant in conformity with the direction of the Court under sub -
section (1)"  The U.P. Amendment makes no such provision.  
 
21. Application for anticipatory bail to be decided finally within 
30 days: The U.P. Amendment under sub -section (5)  of Section 
438 CrPC introduced vide Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 
2018, w.e.f. 21.04.2018  provides that the Court concerned shall 
finally dispose of an application for grant of anticipatory bail 
under sub -section  (1) of Section 438 CrPC  within 30 days of the 
date of such application. The Central Act makes no such 
provision.  
 
22. Offences wherein anticipatory bail cannot be granted u/s 
438 CrPC:  Vide Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018, w.e.f. 
21.04.2018, a new provision in the form of sub -section (4) has 
been added  under the Central Act  which provides that S ection 
438 CrPC shall not apply to any case involving the arrest of any 
person on accusation relating to section 376(3) or section 
376AB or section 376DA and section 376DB of the IPC. On the 
contrary, the U.P. Amendment under sub -section (6), has made 
provision regarding non - applicability  to the offences arising 
out of:  
Page 27 of 48 
 (i)  the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967;  
(ii) the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,  1985;  
(iii)  the Official Secret Act, 1923;  
(iv)  the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti -Social Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1986.  
(b)  in the offences, in which death sentence can be awarded.  
Lastly, under sub -section (7), the U.P. Amendment makes a 
provision, which has not  been provided under the Central Act. 
The provision as applicable in Uttar Pradesh is as under:  
“(7) If an application under this section has been made by any 
person to the High Court, no application by the same person 
shall be ente rtained by the Court of Session”.  
 
23. Which court is competent to entertain application for 
anticipatory bail u/s 438 CrPC?:  Section 438 CrPC provides 
that the accused may apply to the Court of Session or to the 
High Court, thereby making it clear that the person concerned 
has a right to move either the High Court or the Court of 
Session and that their jurisdiction is concurrent. This right 
cannot be superseded by any rule of practice that the party must 
approach the Court of Session b efore coming to the High Court.  
Notably the U.P. Amendment u nder sub - section (7) provides 
that- "if an application under this section has been made by any 
person to the High Court, no application by the same person 
shall be entertained by the Court of Session". Thereby meaning, 
that while, both the courts have concurrent jurisdiction, but if 
the applicant in the first instance chooses to approach the High 
Court and has accordingly submitted an application in that 
Page 28 of 48 
 court, the Session Court is barred from entertaining an 
application by the concerned person.  
 
24. Application for anticipatory bail cannot be ordinarily 
moved directly to High Court:  The Hon'ble Allahaba d High 
Court has held that t he bail application filed under Section 438 
of CrPC is not maintainable before the High Court without 
exhausting remedy before the Court of Sessions, which has got 
concurrent jurisdiction. However, for extraneous or special 
reasons, the High Court can also exercise such power for grant 
of the remedy under the said provision . See: Harendra Singh 
Vs. State of U.P., Cri.Misc.  Application no. 6478/2019(Bail)  
 
25. Guidelines of Allahabad High Court on entertaining 
applications for anticipatory bail by High Court and court of 
Sessions:  The Hon'ble Allahabad High Court in a later decision in 
elaborately dealing with the  question of concurrent jurisdiction of 
the High Court and the Sessions Court has laid down  the 
following legal preposition:  
(1) Section 438 on its plain terms does not require a party to first 
approach Sessions Court before applying to the High Court for 
grant of anticipatory bail.  
(2) Notwithstanding concurrent jurisdiction being conferred on the 
two courts, strong cogent, compelling and special circumstances 
must necessarily be found to exist for the High Court to be 
approached in the first instance.  
(3) The existence of such factors be left for the court to consider in 
each individual matter.  
Page 29 of 48 
 (4) The words "exceptional" or "extraordinary" are understood to 
mean atypical, rare, out of ordinary, unusual or uncommon.  
(5) Thus , an applicant can challenge the order of the Sessions Court 
in revision before the  High Court, thereby providing him with 
another avenue to correct the mistake of the lower court.  See: 
Vinod Kumar Vs. State of U.P., 2019 (12) ADJ 495  
 
26. Five -Judge Bench judgment of Allahabad High Court on 
issue of jurisdiction to entertain application for anticipatory 
bail by High Court and Sessions Judge:  The legal position on 
this question has been unequivocally settled by a five Judges 
Bench in  Ankit Bharti v. State of U.P, Crl. Misc. Anticipatory 
Bail Applic ation u/s 438 CrPC No . 1094/2020 decided on 
02.03.2020. The Hon'ble High Court in this judgment has 
approved the  observations in Vinod Kumar case (supra).  
Further the Hon'ble Bench has also laid that the special 
circumstances must necessarily be supported and established 
from the material on record. There must be strong foundation in 
support of the imminent threat of arrest.  It may also be kept in 
mind that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that grant or 
refusal of bail being an interlocutory matter ther e is no finality 
in the matter.  In this context, the U.P. Amendment under the 
Explanation attached to section 438 (2) has specifically 
provided that "The final order made on an application for 
direction under sub - section (1) shall not be construed as an 
interlocutory order for the purpose of this  Code" . See: 
Usmanbhai Dawoodbhai Memon Vs. State of Gujarat, (1988) 2 
SCC 271  
 
Page 30 of 48 
 27. Which court has jurisdiction to entertain application for 
anticipatory bail when offence committed in one state but 
accused resides in other state?:  There has been a controversy 
over the question as to the court to which the accused may 
apply for anticipatory bail when he resides in one State and the 
offence is committed in another State.  
(i) The Karnataka, Bombay and Delhi High Courts have held 
that there is no bar to the applicant seeking redress from the 
court within whose jurisdiction he is apprehending  arrest.  
See: Naidu Vs. State of Karnataka, 1984 CrL J 757(Kant)  
(ii) On the other hand, the Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh and Patna High Courts have held that - (a) 
bail is incidental to the trial of an offence, (b) there being no 
special provision u/s. 438, the general  rule enacted in 
section 177 Cr PC should apply, so that only that High 
Court within whose jurisdiction the alleged offence was 
committed and which has jurisdiction to try the case has 
jurisdiction to grant anticipatory bail and not the High Court 
of the State where the applicant  resides and apprehends 
arrest.  See: Ravinder Vs. State of Punjab, 1984 Cr LJ 714 (P 
& H)  
(iii) The Calcutta High Court in a Full Bench judgment in 
Sailesh Jaiswal Vs. State, (1998) 2 CHN 81  has observed 
that exercise of  jurisdiction for anticipatory bail by any 
court, beyond the local limits of the jurisdiction in  which 
the offences have been committed is limited to the extent of 
consideration of bail for  transitional period, but it has no 
jurisdiction to transgress. It is the limit of the local  
Page 31 of 48 
 jurisdiction of the Court within which the offence is alleged 
to have been committed.  
(iv) In a case where, in respect of an offence committed by in 
the State of Assam, the petitioner obtained the anticipatory 
bail order from Bombay High Court on the ground that they 
were residing in the State of Maharashtra, the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court set aside such order of anticipatory bail 
passed by the Bombay High Court  in State Vs. 
Krishnakumar, AIR 1998 SC 144 . The court observed that 
the question of granting anticipatory bail to any person who 
is allegedly connected with the offence in question must for 
all practical purposes be considered by the High Court of 
Gauhati within whose territorial jurisdiction such activities 
should have been perpetrated. In the above mentioned two 
cases, even though the Hon'ble Supreme Court did not 
specifically deny  the jurisdiction of the court to entertain 
the anticipatory bail application by a person within whose 
jurisdiction, he resides and apprehends arrest, but for all 
practical purposes conferred the jurisdiction on the High 
Court within whose jurisdiction the alleged offence had 
been committed by setting aside the orders of the High 
Court granting anticipatory bail of the Bombay High Court 
and transferred the anticipatory bail petition to be heard by 
the Division Bench of the Gauhati High Court.  
 
28. Anticipatory bail when not to be granted u/s 438 CrPC?:  
Being an extraordinary remedy, it should be resorted to only in 
a special case and the petitioner must establish special 
circumstances, mere allegation of mala fides or claim of 
Page 32 of 48 
 innocence is not enough. He must adduce prima facie evidence 
in support of his allegation that a serious charge of a non -
bailable offence has been brought against him out of malice. In 
addition to this, the conditions relevant to section 437, ante, 
must also be made out to obtain anticipatory bail. It follows that 
anticipatory bail should not ordinarily be granted : 
(i) Where the charge is so serious as to be punishable with 
death or imprisonment for life. Unless the Court is satisfied 
at the very start of the investigation that the charge is false 
or groundless. The position of such person before arrest 
cannot be better than after arrest. See: Gurcharan Singh Vs. 
State, AIR 1978 SC 179 (para 23)  
(ii) Where a legitimate case for remanding the offender to 
police custody for the purpose of investigation or a 
reasonable claim to secure incriminating material from the 
offender under S. 27 of the Evidence Act can be made out. 
The mere purpose of identification of the accused during 
investigation would not be a ground for refusal of bail. See: 
Burbaksh  Vs. State of Punjab, AIR P&H 1 (FB)  
(iii) In the case of serious economic offences, e.g. where the 
prosecution is for evading income -tax to the tune of lac ks of 
rupees against the community, the investigation should not 
be stifled at the very threshold of the investigation, by 
granting anticipatory bail. In such cases, there is also the 
additional consideration of the likelihood of the offence 
being repeated. See: Somabhai Vs. State of Gujarat, (177) 
CRLj 1523  
(iv) Anticipatory Bail in Economic Offences Matters: Power u/s 
438 CrPC being an extraordinary remedy, has to be 
Page 33 of 48 
 exercised sparingly, more so, in cases of economic 
offences. Economic offences stand as a different class as 
they affect the economic fabric of society. Where it was 
held that an economic offence, the accused is not entitled to 
anticipatory bail. The Hon'ble Apex Court has held as 
under. The entire community is aggrieved if the economic 
offenders who ruin the economy of the State are not 
brought to book. A murder may be committed in the heat of 
moment upon passions being aroused. An economic offence 
is committed with cool calculation and deliberate design 
with an eye on personal profit regardless of the 
consequence to the community. A disregard for the interest 
of the community can be manifested only at the cost of 
forfeiting the trust and faith of the community in the system 
to administer justice in an even -handed manner without fear 
of criticism from the quarters which view while collar 
crimes with a permissive eye unmindful of the damage done 
to the national economy and national interest.  See: 
Enforcement Directorate Vs. Ashok Kumar Jain, (1998 ) 2 
SCC 105  
(v) Where the offence involved is anti -social" and detrimental 
to poor people of a substantial dimension.  
(vi) As a rule, anticipatory bail should not ordinarily be granted 
in the case of unnatural death of a daughter -in-law in the 
house of the father -in-law (popularly known as 'dowry 
death'), so long  as the case is still under investigation. 
Where there is a case for remand for the purpose of 
investigation, not being a purpose of identification of the 
accused.  
Page 34 of 48 
 (vii) Anticipatory bail should not be granted in murder case 
when the investigation is still incomplete and the proper 
course of adopt is to leave the matter to the Trial Court 
when the accused applies for regular bail.  
(viii)  When the accused is alleged to have committed serious 
offence of murder and conspiracy to murder and the 
available evidence points out, the complicity of the accused 
in the crime, anticipatory bail to such an accused is 
improper. When the name of the petitioner transpired in 
FIR of a murder case, anticipatory bail should not be 
granted at the stage of investigation. See: State Vs. Deepak, 
1999 CrL J 162 (Guj)  
(ix) When the mother -in-law poured kerosene oil on the body of 
the daughter in law but the victim has somehow survived 
the anticipatory ball in such attempt to murder charge 
should not be granted. See: Chandrakanti Vs. State, 2004 
CrLJ (NOC) 259 (BOM)  
(x) When the applicants are involved in offence under S. 498A 
and S.304B IPC and investigation of the offences regarding 
torture of the wife by the relatives of the husband are in 
progress, they should not be enlarged in the anticipatory 
bail.  
(xi) When the High Court granted anticipatory bail to the 
accused relying on some contradictory statements in the 
statement of the witnesses, the Supreme Court set is aside 
holding it is not a fit case for grant of anticipatory bail." 
When the allegation of rape has been made against the 
police officers and there is every likelihood of the officers 
tampering with evidence if released on bail, anticipatory 
Page 35 of 48 
 bail should not be granted. See: Chunilal Vs. State, 1996 
CrLJ 3864 (HP)  
(xii) When prima facie offence of murder committed by the 
police officers against the innocent persons in false 
encounter piercing their innocent persons with bullets 
without any provocation, anticipatory bail should not be 
granted. See:  
(xiii)  When the accused is alleged to have committed of 
cheating the innocent job seekers taking huge amount from 
them on the false promise of giving job, such an accused 
needs police interrogation in the custody. So, the 
anticipatory bail should not be granted to him.  
(xiv)  The petitioner accused of torturing a village boy and there 
were as many of evidence injuries on the body of the boy. 
He had criminal antecedents. So, the anticipatory bail 
prayed for by him has been refused.  
(xv) In view of fraudulent evasion of customs duty of Rs. 6.64 
crores by way of mis -declaration and under -valuation in 
respect of import of MPEG Cords in the name of four 
persons, in view of the prima facie involvement in the 
offence anticipatory bail should not be granted." The case if 
pending against the petitioner for various offences under 
IPC read with S. 27 of the Arms Act. He is involved in 
eight other cases. In one case, even if he was granted 
statutory bail, he did not comply with the conditions of bail 
nor did he appear before the police to show his bona fide. 
So, he is not entitled to the anticipatory bail.  
(xvi)  In a murder case, the allegations against the petitioner is 
conspiracy to commit murder. Even though eye witness is 
Page 36 of 48 
 available co -accused implicates the petitioner, no 
anticipatory bail is to be granted. See: Sandeep Vs. State, 
2008 CrL J 4744 (Mad).  
(xvii)  In a case of cheating and forgery of the petitioner by 
performing eye operations of a number of persons without 
any medical degree, the custodial interrogation of the 
petitioner is necessary. So, no anticipatory bail should be 
granted. When the accused in collusion with others 
defrauded the bank to the tune of over two crores and is 
found to have master minded the entire transaction, he is 
not entitled to anticipatory bail. See: HDFC Bank Ltd. Vs. 
JJ Mannan, AIR 2010 SC 618.  
 
29. How long can an anticipatory bail granted u/s 438 CrPC 
survive?:  The line of judgments that anticipatory bail should 
not be for a limited period places its reliance on the Constitution 
Bench decision in Sri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia case (supra). In 
Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre (supra), the Supreme Court has 
taken the view that the Constitution Bench has held that 
anticipatory bail granted by the court should ordinarily continue 
till the trial of the case (See para 94 & 95). This judgment has 
been followed in. The other line of judgments is that orders of 
anticipatory bail should be of a limited duration. Relevant 
judgments in this regard are - Notably these cases have been 
decided without referring to the Constitution Bench judgment in 
Sri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia case (supra). A latter judgment in 
has referred to a contention based on the Constitution Bench 
decision in Sibbia (supra) and yet it has taken a view that the 
protection under section 438 is only till the investigation is 
Page 37 of 48 
 completed and charge sheet is filed (See paragraphs 14 & 18 to 
20). It has been followed in Satpal Singh Vs. State of Punjab, 
(2018) SCC Online SC 415 . Recently a three - judge bench of 
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in SLP (Criminal) Nos. 7281 -7282 
of 2017, in Sushila Aggrawal & Ors. v. State (NCT of Delhi) & 
anr, in the light of conflicting views of the different Benches of 
varying strength, opined that the legal position needs to be 
authoritatively settled in clear and unambiguous terms. 
Therefore, framing the following questions, it was referred to 
the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India for referring the matter to the 
larger Bench:  
 
(1) Whether the protection granted to a person under Section 438 
CrPC should be limited to a fixed period so as to enable the 
person to surrender before the Trial Court and seek regular bail.  
(2) Whether the life of an anticipatory bail should end at the time 
and stage when the accused is summoned by the court.  
 
30. Duration of anticipatory bail is not subject to any specific 
time limit:  A Constitution Bench has ruled that under Section 
438 CrPC, an anticipatory bail should not invariably be limited 
to a fixed period. The protection can be granted to the accused 
without any restriction on time. Normal conditions under 
Section 437(3) CrPC read with section 438(2) CrPC should be 
imposed; if there are specific facts or features in regard to any 
offence. It is open to the court to impose any appropriate 
condition including fixed nature of relief, or it being tied to an 
event etc. See: Sushila Aggarwal VS. State (NCT of Delhi), 
AIR 2020 SC 831.  (Five -Judge Bench)  
Page 38 of 48 
  
31. No blanket order of anticipatory bail to cover all offences 
likely to be committed by the accused in future can be 
passed by court u/s 438 CrPC:  
(1) The court cannot pass a 'blanket order' of anticipatory bail to the 
effect that the applicant shall be released on bail 'whenever 
arrested for whichever offence  whatsoever'.  
(2) The order of the court, granting the anticipatory bail, must also 
be clear and specific, with reference to the specific events and 
facts disclosed in the application.  
(3) It is imperative for the court to specify the offence or offences 
in respect of which alone the order will be effective. The power 
should not be exercised in a vacuum.  
 
32. Imposing condition of payment of maintenance by husband 
to wife for grant of anticipatory bail held proper by 
Supreme Court:  While granting anticipatory bail to the 
petitioner, in the complaint case, for offences punishable inter 
alia under Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, imposing 
conditions in addition to those mentioned under Section 438(2) 
of the CrPC, directed the petitioner/applicant “in view of the 
facts and circumstances........ and the divorce case between the 
parties is pending as such till  any order is passed, this 
application is disposed of with direction that till any order is 
passed, the petitioner shall pay Rs. 20,000/ - per month to the 
opposite party no. 2”. The order was challenged before the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court, on the plea that no such condition, 
regarding payment of monthly maintenance can be made while 
granting anticipatory bail. The Supreme Court held the 
Page 39 of 48 
 condition valid and dismissed the petition filed against grant of 
anticipatory bail. See: Order dated 16.10.2020 of the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court passed in SLP (Crim.) Diary No. 20961/2020 , 
Mohan Murari Vs. The State of Bihar (Three -Judge Bench)  
 
33. Conditional order of anticipatory bail: In the context of 
conditions under section 438(2)  CrPC, the Supreme Court 
has observed that:  While exercising power under Section 438 
of the Code, the Court is duly bound to strike a balance between 
the individual's right to personal freedom and the right of 
investigation of the police. For the same, while granting relief 
under Section 438(1), appropriate conditions can be imposed 
Under Section 438(2) so as to ensure an uninterrupted 
investigation. The object of putting such conditions should be to 
avoid the possibility of the person hampering the investigation. 
Thus, any condition which has no ref erence to the fairness or 
propriety of the investigation or trial, cannot be countenanced as 
permissible under the law. So, the discretion of the Court while 
imposing conditions must be exercised with utmost restraint.  
The words "any condition" used in the provision should not be 
regarded as conferring absolute power on a court of law to 
impose any condition that it chooses to impose. Any condition 
has to be interpreted as a reasonable condition acceptable in the 
facts permissible in the circumstance and ef fective in the 
pragmatic sense and should not defeat the order of grant of bail. 
We are of the view that the present facts and circumstances of 
the case do not warrant such extreme condition to be imposed . 
In the same refrain, the Hon'ble Apex Court, with respect to 
restrictions on the applicant to travel abroad has made valuable 
Page 40 of 48 
 observations in many of its judgments. It has observed that, "the 
right to travel abroad is a valuable one and an integral part of 
the right to personal liberty. Equally, however, the pre -condition 
of securing prior permission before travelling abroad is a crucial 
ingredient which undoubtedly was engrafted as a condition for 
the grant of anticipatory bail in this case ……… . At best, the 
condition for seeking prior permission before travelling abroad 
could have been regulated, not deleted altogether.  The Supreme 
Court has passed multiple orders allowing an accused enlarged 
on bail to travel abroad. The Supreme Court allowed an 
accused -applicant to travel abroad for medical treatment by 
modifying its earlier bail order on ground of medical exigency. 
An accused - appellant was allowed to travel abroad to meet in 
the exigencies of family situation. In the accused -petitioner was 
permitted to travel to Indonesia in connection with his 
employment and to return once the work was compl eted.  
Reiterating the long held legal principles the Hon'ble Su preme 
Court in  permitted the accused -appellant to travel to the U.S. 
The Court has observed - The human right to dignity and the 
protection of constitutional safeguards should not become 
illusory by the imposition of conditions which are 
disproportionate to the need to secure the presence of the 
accused, the proper course of investigation and eventually to 
ensure a fair trial. The conditions which are imposed by the 
court must bear a proportional relationship to the purpose of 
imposing the conditions. The nature of the risk which is posed 
by the grant of permission as sought in this case must be 
carefully evaluated in each case. See: Sumit Mehta Vs. State of 
Delhi(NCT of Delhi), (2013) 15 SCC 570  
Page 41 of 48 
  
34. Regular b ail by subordinate court versus interim or 
anticipatory b ail by High Court : The Hon'ble Supreme Court 
in an order dated 03 August, 2017 in the case  has observed as 
under: When this Court or a High Court or even a Sessions 
Judge grants interim anticipatory bail and the matter is pending 
before that Court, there can be no occasion for the accused to 
appear and surrender before the learned trial court and seek 
regular bail. The predicament of the subordinate Judge in 
considering the prayer for regular bail and the impossibility of 
denial of such bail in the face of the pre -arrest bail  granted by a 
higher forum is real. Surrender and a bail application in such 
circumstances is nothing but an abuse of the process of law by 
the concerned accused. Once a regular bail is granted by a 
subordinate Court on the strength of the interim/pre -arrest bail 
granted by the superior Court, even if the superior Court is to 
dismiss the plea of anticipatory bail upon fuller consideration of 
the matter, the regular bail granted by the subordinate Court 
would continue to hold the field, rendering the ultimat e 
rejection of the pre - arrest bail by the superior Court 
meaningless.  If this is a practice that is prevailing in some of the 
subordinat e Courts in the Country and we h ave had notice of 
several such cases, time has come to put the learned subordinate 
Courts in the country to notice that such a practice must be 
discontinued and consideration of regular bail applications upon 
surrender during the pendency of the application for pre -arrest 
bail before a superior Court must be discouraged. We, therefore, 
direc t that a copy of this order be forwarded to the Director of 
all Judicial Academies in the country to be brought to the notice 
Page 42 of 48 
 of all judicial officers exercising criminal jurisdiction in their 
respective States.  See: of Rukmani Mahato Vs. State of 
Jharkhand, Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) no. 2411/2016   
 
35. No anticipatory b ail u/s 438 CrPC for offence under SC&ST  
(Prevention of Atrocities ) Act, 1989 : Section 18 of the 
SC&ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (Now 2015 Act)  
provides : Section 438 of the Code not to apply to persons 
committing an offence under the Act - Nothing in section 438 of 
the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving the arrest 
of any person on an accusation of having committed an offence 
under this Act.  With respect to anticipatory ball vis-à-vis the 
Act of 1989, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in" held that "there is 
no absolute bar against grant of anticipatory bail in cases under 
the Atrocities Act if no prime facie case is made out or where 
on judicial scrutiny the complaint is found to be prima facie 
mala fide.  Taking note of the above and other findings of the 
Supreme Court, Section 18 -A has been added to the Act of 
1989, which inter alia provides - 
The provisions of Section 438 of the Code shall not apply to a 
case under this Act notwithstanding any judgment or order or 
direction of any court.  The Hon'ble Supreme Court upheld  in 
State of M.P. Vs. Ram Krishna Balothia, AIR 1995 SC 1198  the 
validity of Section 18 of the Act of 1989.  Decision to the same 
effect was rendered in Vilas Pandurang Pawar v. State of 
Maharashtra (2012) 8 SCC 795: AIR 2012 SC3316.  In case of 
Prithvi Raj Chauhan Vs. Union of India, AIR 2020 SC 1036 
dealing with the legality of in sertion of Section 18 -A, has 
observed - Concerning the applicability of provisions of Section 
Page 43 of 48 
 438 CrPC, it shall not apply to the cases under the Act of 1989. 
However, if the complaint does not make out a prima facie case 
for applicability of the provisions of the Act of 1989, the bar 
created by section 18 and 18A( i) shall not apply . W hile 
considering any application seeking pre -arrest bail, the High 
Court has to balance the two interests: i.e. that the power is not 
so used as to convert the jurisdiction into that under Section 438 
of the Criminal Procedure Code, but that it is used sparingly and 
such orders made in very exceptional cases where no prima 
facie offence is made out as shown in the FIR, and further also 
that if such orders are not made in those classes of cases, the 
result would inevitably be a miscarriage of justice or abuse of 
process of law . This was also clarified by the Hon'ble Court in 
the review petition - Union of India v. State of Maharashtra, 
AIR 2019 SC 4917  
36. Anticipatory bail  for offences  under SC/ST Act  can be granted by 
court if  the abusive words were made over telephone/ mobile phone ,  
and not in public view ,  as  the provisions of SC/ST Act would not be 
attracted:  If the abusive remarks were made over the telephone/ 
mobile phone and not in public view, the provisions of the SC/ST 
Act would not be attracted.  In such a case, the accused can move 
his regular bail application or anticipatory bail application in 
accordance with law before the jurisdictional court. See: Judgment 
dated 22.12.2025 of the Calcutta High Court passed in CRM (A) 
4050 of 2025, Nurul Alas Vs State of West Bengal.  
37. Police c ustody  remand  for a likely discovery u/s 27 of 
Evidence Act  during anticipatory bail:  The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court in Gurubaksh Singh Sibba Vs. State of Punjab, AIR 1980 
Page 44 of 48 
 SC 1632 has taking note of such an eventuality  has laid down  
That in the event of the police making out a case of a likely 
discovery under  Section 27 of the Evidence Act, person 
released on bail shall be liable to be taken in police custody for 
facilitating the discovery. Besides, if and when the occasion 
arises, it may be possible for the prosecution to claim the 
benefit of Section 27 of the Evidence Act in regard to a 
discovery of facts made in pursuance of information supplied by 
a person released on bail by invoking the principle stated by this 
Court in State of UP. v. Deoman Upadhyaya, AIR 1960 SC 
1125, 1961(1) SCR 14 .  
 
38. Limited custody, deemed custody and Section 27 of 
Evidence Act: In the light, the Hon'ble Apex Court in 
Sushila Aggarwal has elaborated : Therefore, the "limited 
custody" or "deemed custody" to facilitate the requirement of 
the investigative authority, would be sufficient for the purpose 
of fulfilling the provisions of Section 27, in the event of 
recovery of an article, or discovery of a fact, which is relatable 
to a statement made during such event (i .e. deemed custody). In 
such event, there is no question (or necessity) of asking the 
accused to separately surrender and seek regular bail. Sushila 
Aggarwal Vs State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2020 SC 831 (Five -
Judge Bench)  
 
39. Application of Section 438 CrPC to juvenile:  The Madhya 
Pradesh High Court in has held that provisions of section 12 of 
the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2000 
do not provide the power to grant anticipatory bail to the JJ 
Page 45 of 48 
 Board. Therefore, the JJ Board has no jurisdiction to entertain 
application under section 438 of CrPC. The High Court held 
that a 'juvenile in conflict with law' can make an application for 
bail only before the JJ Board and accordingly such a juvenile is 
not entitled to maintain an application for grant of anticipatory 
bail u/s 438 of CrPC. Similar opinion has been expressed in 
another judgment of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.  See: 
Kamlesh Gurjar Vs. State of M.P., M.Cr.C no. 10345 of 2009  
(i) However, the following the judgment of the same High 
Court held that the provision of anticipatory bail as 
provided under section 438 CrPC is applicable to a juvenile 
in conflict with law and accordingly an application 
submitted by such person before the appropriate court is 
maintainable.  
(ii) This  issue has been also examined by the Allahabad High 
Court in Shahaab Ali (Minor)  v. State of U.P, Crl. Misc. 
Anticipatory Bail Application u/s 438 CrPC No. 597/2020 , 
decided on 20.01.2020. The court has examined the 
question from two perspectives - (1) Position where the 
minor approaches the court after registration of FIR and (ii) 
Position where a minor apprehends arrest and detention 
prior to the registration of FIR. Examining the legal 
provisions under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection 
of Chil dren) Act, 2015 and in particular the non obstante 
clause under section 1(4) of the II Act, the court held that 
the provisions under section 438 CrPC are excluded by the 
JJ Act. Therefore, once an FIR is registered or information 
is otherwise recorded by the concerned authority with 
regard to a child in conflict with law, the provision of 
Page 46 of 48 
 section  438 stand impliedly excluded. Thus, post 
registration of FIR anticipatory bail cannot be granted to a 
child covered under the JJ Act. However, as the provision 
regarding bail under the JJ Act comes into play only after 
the recording of the report regarding an offence, therefore, 
prior to that a child apprehending detention may invoke the 
provision regarding anticipatory bail before the Sessions or 
High Court . 
35.1 No anticipatory bail for offences under NDPS Act:  
Anticipatory bail cannot be granted to a person apprehending 
arrest for the offences under the NDPS Act,  1985.  See: Order 
dated 07.07.2025 passed by the Supreme Court in SLP 
(Criminal) no.  9540/2025, Dinesh Chander Vs. State of Haryan a 
35.2 Anticipatory bail to accused can be granted for offences under NDPS 
Act:   Anticipatory bail to accused can be granted u/s 438 CrPC (now Section 
482 BNSS) for offences under the NDPS Act, 1985:     See: Judgment dated 
30.05.2025 passed by Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court in Criminal 
Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application u/s 438 CrPC No. 447 of 2025, Sudhir Vs. 
State of UP  
36. Only authorization, not Vakalatnama, is required with bail application: CrPC 
does not contain any Section that makes filing a Vakalatnama mandatory for 
filing a bail application, whether it is regular bail, anticipatory bail and 
suspension of sentence after conviction. The CrPC only requires that the 
accused be represented by a duly authorized advocate. Moreover, though CrPC 
does not mandate, however, the courts require some form of authorization  for 
an advocate to act on behalf of the accused  or conv ict and the providing of an 
NOC by the earlier counsel is a matter of ‘good practice’ rather than a matter of 
right, especially in criminal cases wherein life and liberty of a detenu is an 
issue and an accused or convict  has a fundamental right  guaranteed by Article 
Page 47 of 48 
 22(1)  of the Constitution  of India and reiterated in Section 303  and 41 -D of 
the CrPC to be represented by an advocate of his or her choice as has been held 
by the Supreme Court  in the case of Subedar Vs. State of UP, (2020) 17 SCC 
765. See: Order dated 21.11.2025 passed by Division Bench of Lucknow 
Bench of Allahabad High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 1283/2021, Manorama 
Shukla Vs. State of UP  
37.   Recovery of incriminating material by police to be 
mandatorily made by audio - video recording:       Allahabad 
High Court  has directed the DGP of Uttar Pradesh to issue detailed 
SOP as required by  Rule 18(5) of the Uttar Pradesh BNSS Rules, 
2024  for mandatory conducting  audio vedio recording of search,  
seizure or possession of property or other incriminating material 
including the preparation of list of articles or property seized  as 
well as signature  of witnesses on E -Sakshy a Portal and uploading 
the same or through other audio video electronic means including 
mobile phone of the  police officer on duty and dir ection may also 
be issued  that failing to comply with  the mandatory requirement 
of Section 105 of the BNSS read with Rule 18 of the BNSS Rules, 
2024 may attract disciplinary proceedings  against the concerned 
police officer so that on the one hand it would save innocent 
persons from false recovery of property or articles and on the other 
hand to prepare foolproof evidence against the criminals for 
hearing the bail application as well as  during trial. See: Judment 
dated 05.01.2026 of the Allahabad High Court passed on Criminal  
Misc. Bail Application No. 40989 of 2025, Shadab Vs State of UP, 
(2026 LiveLaw  
 
  
 
 
 
XXXXX  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 48 of 48