IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA 
(EXTRAORDINARY CIVIL  JURISDICTION) 
CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. ------------OF 2010 
IN THE MATTER OF : 
Fatehpal  Singh Singh 
R/o Panchkula 
         PETITIONER 
 
    VERSUS 
 
1.  Union of India 
 Through its Secretary 
 Govt. of India New Delhi 
 
2.   Bar Council of India 
 Through its Chairman 
 New Delhi. 
 
        RESPONDENTS 
AND IN THE MATTER OF : 
  Article 14 read with Article 19 (1) G  
 
AND IN THE MATTER OF: 
  Article 246 read with entry 77 list 1, 7 th  schedule. 
 
AND THE MATTER OF: 
  Denial of the right to practice as provided in the  Advocates Act, 1961 
provisions:  Section 2 (1) A, Section 24 (1), Sectio n 24 (3) and Sections  29, 30 and 33.  
AND THE MATTER OF: 
  Civil writ petition under Article 226 of Constitut ion of India Challenging 
the arbitrary and unreasonable actions of the Bar Cou ncil of India in laying down rules to 
conduct the Bar Exams to grant the Right to Practice  of enrolled Advocates. 
TO, 
  THE HON’BLE CHIEF JUSTICE AND 
  HIS COMPANION JUSTICES OF THE PUNJAB AND HARYANA HIGH COURT 
  AT  CHANDIGARH.   
 
The petitioner above named most respectfully   S H E W E T H:- 
 
1.  The petitioner is a citizen of India.  He was born on  24 th  October  1983 ( Twenty Forth 
October  Nineteen Eighty Three). 
 
2.  The Petitioner has passed his B.A., LL.B Degree from Nalsar  Law University, Hyderabad  
on May 25 th , 2010. He has further been admitted to the rolls of the Bar Council of 
Punjab and Haryana (Check name) on 1st  of June 2010. The true copies of the provisional 
certificates and marks statement of the petitioner in respect of his B.A., LL.B Degree are 
marked as Annexure-A. His certificate of enrollment is marked as Annexure – B.  
 
3.   Respondent No. 1 is the Union of India through The  Secretary, Ministry  of Law and 
Justice, responsible  under the Constitution  for lay down  legislation related to the 
practice of law and the conduct of advocates.   
 
4.  Respondent No. 1 appoints  Commission and Committees  to advise  it on the national  
pattern of legal education general policies  for the   development of legal education, 
legal  petition and  law as a whole in all stages. 
 
5.  Respondent No. 1 is also responsible  under the Constitu tion for the administration  of 
the Union  Territories  and has  executive  and legisl ative  authority  for all subjects 
including reforms and legal education. 
 
6.  Respondent No. 2 is a body  created in furtherance of the provisions of the Advocates 
Act, 1961. Its primary responsibility is to the determ ine and co-ordinate the  stands of 
legal education in the Country and law down qualifi cations and conditions necessary for 
enrollment to the State Bar Councils in the Country.   
 
 
7.  It is respectfully submitted the all the above name Re spondents have to Act in co-
ordination with each other in order to ensure fair an uniform system for the legal 
profession as envisaged by national policies and Nationa l Knowledge Commission. 
 
8.  That around 14 December 2009, the Hon’ble Supreme C ourt in Union of India v. Bonnie 
Foi Law College and Ors., SLP No 22337/2008 had aske d the Union of India about the 
conducting of such Bar Exam. The Hon’ble Chairman of  the Bar Council of India, then 
acting as the Solicitor General of India for the Uni on of India, had submitted that a three 
member panel had been formed to see the viability of  the exam and the manner in 
which it ought to be conducted. He also submitted to Court that a Directorate of Legal 
Education would come into force by the 31 st  of December 2010. A copy of the Order of 
the Supreme Court is marked as Annexure C. 
  
9.  Respondent No. 2 adopted a resolution on 10 th  April  2010 to conduct  an All India Bar 
Exam. The exam was to be conducted so that the passing  of the same would entitle an 
advocate to practice law in India. No official news of the same resolution was published 
until and around the 2 nd  of June 2010 where in the news of the resolution and  the draft 
rules were put up on the website of Respondent No. 2.  A copy of the draft rules and 
resolution as available on the Bar Council of India w ebsite as late as 27 th  June 2010 is 
marked as Annexure –D .   
 
10.   That on the 2 nd  of June, 2010, newspapers reported that an All India  Bar Exam would be 
conducted and that private legal consulting firm Ra inmaker would be in-charge of 
conducted the exam. That presentations were also made by the firm as to how the 
exam would be conducted. A copy of the newspaper ite ms is marked as Annexure – E. A 
copy of the presentation made by consulting firm Rain maker about the conduct of this 
exam is marked as Annexure- F.  
 
11.  Till the 12 th  of June, 2010, no official notification was passed r egarding the conduct of 
the exam and the petitioner’s future along with othe r law students was left hanging till 
such time. On the 12 th  of June, the said draft rules on the website of Resp ondent No. 2 
were notified.  
 
12.  As the delayed notification of the exam came as a sudd en shock to the Petitioner’s 
future, he was further informed that he wouldn’t be able to practice or appear in Courts 
till such time he passed the exam. In effect, he would  be unemployed or under a senior 
without a source of income till the passing of such ex am. The source of such information 
was the website of respondent No. 2 that in the Freque ntly Asked Questions (FAQ’s) 
page categorically stated that all those persons gradua ting in the academic year 2009-
2010 have mandatorily to pass the bar exam before the y will be permitted to practice 
the profession of law. Moreover, that the qualificat ion of passing the Bar Exam shall not 
apply to those persons who have graduated prior to 200 9-2010. A copy of the same is 
attached herewith as Annexure G. 
 
 
13.  That the petitioners herein have graduated from one  of the premier law institutes in the 
country. Moreover, that throughout the course in law  school, the petitioners have 
mandatorily been made to undergo several internships a t law firms, corporate house, 
and lawyers.  
 
 
14.  In view of the enrollment procedure provided by the  State Bar Council and the Advocate 
Act, The petitioner enrolled as an Advocate  on the state rolls on 01 June 2010.  
 
15.  The Petitioner met the qualifications prescribed to b e enrolled and entail a right to 
practice under the Advocates Act, 1961 and paid the required fees for the purposes of 
enrollment which was completed on 2 nd  June 2010. The petitioner’s name was 
subsequently entered on the state rolls of Punjab and H aryana Bar  Council. 
 
 
16.  The present petition raises vital questions of public as well as private importance for 
determination by this Hon’ble Court.  The vital ques tion of law involved concerns the 
career of a large number of young students who in spi te of economic and financial 
difficulties have obtained their education.   
 
17.  This petition also raises the question of the definition  of an ‘Advocate’ as per the 
Advocates Act, 1961. 
 
18.  The present petition also raises a cry on the ground o f restriction of the Right to Practice 
which is adversely oppressing his Right to Work. 
 
19.  The impugned rules of the Bar Council of India is ult ra vires the Constitution and the 
Advocate Act, 1961,   arbitrary, discriminatory, unr easonable, unjust, invalid  and unfair 
and following amongst others  
 
                                                                                 GROUNDS  
 
A.  That Section 24 of the  Advocates Act, 1961 (the Act ) deals with enrollment of 
Advocates, and that Section 24 of the Act is further subject to other provisions of the 
Act and the Rules framed there under.  
B.  That as per the three – member Committee report submi tted by the Chairman of 
Respondent No. 2 to the Hon’ble Supreme Court, at p age no. 54, the Chairman has 
categorically stated that the requirement to clear t he Bar Exam shall be introduced only 
by means of a statutory amendment.  
C.  That Respondent No. 2 is not empowered under its consti tuent statute to conduct a Bar 
Exam. As such, only the Law Ministry may prescribe the requirement of an All India Bar 
Exam, and not Respondent No. 2. The object and purpo se of the establishment of 
Respondent No. 2 is to deal with only those classes of  persons qualified as advocates, 
and not those who are in the process of qualifying. 
D.  That the Rules issued by Respondent No. 2 are arbitrar y and devoid of any logic, 
inasmuch as they specify that only those graduating in  the academic year 2009-2010 are 
required to pass the Bar Exam. As such, the object of t he Act and the Notice is to 
regulate and raise the level of those persons permitte d to practice law. Adopting  this 
stance, the Petitioner has passed his B.A., LL.B Degree  from Nalsar  Law University, 
Hyderabad  on May 25 th , 2010. He has further been admitted to the rolls of the Bar 
Council of Punjab and Haryana on 01 June 2010. The true copies of the provisional 
certificates and marks statement of the petitioner in respect of his B.A., LL.B Degree are 
marked as Annexure-A. His certificate of enrollment is marked as Annexure – B. 
E.  That the Respondents have willingly delayed the issuanc e of the notice. The Ministry of 
Law and Justice and Respondent No.2 have been in tal ks since January 2010 regarding 
the possibility of holding an All India Bar Exam, bu t an official statement was only 
released as late as June 2010. Moreover, the Rules wer e released as a draft on June 2, 
2010, specifying that the date of the exam is schedule d for December 5, 2010. As such, 
those graduating in 2009-2010 will be denied the rig ht to perform official legal work by 
virtue of the notice. Such draft rules were notified  only on the 12 th  of June 2010.  
F.  That several persons graduating in 2009-2010 have alre ady enrolled themselves at 
several State Bar Councils. Though Section 30 of the  Act is subject to other provisions 
and Rules framed under the Act, there exists no post en rollment qualification to be 
fulfilled prior to which such persons will be allowed to practice law. 
G.  That having once cleared the requirements of Sectio n 24 of the Advocates Act, 1961, the 
Petitioner has a right to practice as laid down under  Section 30 of the said Act and there 
can be no further qualifications prescribed. The proc ess of prescribing a post enrollment 
Bar Exam without having a corresponding Section in t he Act would have the effect of 
denying any vested rights that would have accrued t o those persons already enrolled. 
H.  That the right to practice and conditions pertaining  thereto are contained in Chapter IV 
of the Advocates Act, 1961, whereas the rule making p ower of the Respondents is 
contained in Chapter VI of the said Act. Moreover, t hat Chapter IV is an exhaustive, 
exclusive code in itself, being more specific in ch aracter, and thus cannot be governed 
by the provisions of Chapter VI of the said Act. 
I.  That the conduct of Respondent No. 2 has been haphaza rd inasmuch as all the notices 
and clarifications have been issued, in June 2010, whi ch is a mere month prior to the 
commencement of work for most 2010 graduating law stu dents, and considering this, 
none of them will be allowed to work in the capacit y of ‘advocates’, but will be put in 
the same position as interns. 
J.  That on enrollment, one of the rights that accrues to  a person is the right to practice. 
Thus, the notice cannot have retrospective effect of denying any such rights that may 
have accrued to those persons enrolled. 
K.  That Section 30 of the Advocates Act gives a right to  all registered under S.24 of the act 
with their names on the state rolls to practice though  out the territory to which the act 
extends thus vesting a right upon those registered as advocates nemo potest mutare 
consilium suum in alterius injuriam  therefore no one is allowed to change his mind to 
the injury of other. So the legislature should also n ot change its mind to prejudice of a 
vested right. This can only be taken away by amendin g the act by the legislature.  
 
L.  That the Petitioner has passed his B.A., LL.B Degree fr om Nalsar  Law University, 
Hyderabad  on May 25 th , 2010. He has further been admitted to the rolls of the Bar 
Council of Punjab and Haryana on 01 June 2010. The true copies of the provisional 
certificates and marks statement of the petitioner in respect of his B.A., LL.B Degree are 
marked as Annexure-A. His certificate of enrollment is marked as Annexure – B.  
 
M.  Whereas the power of a rule making authority is confe rred for promoting the policy and 
purpose of the act and the power cannot be used for any extraneous or irrelevant 
purpose such a over ridding the provisions of the paren t act. This pow er cannot be 
exercised in such a way as to bring into existence substantive rights or disabilities not 
contemplated by the parent act itself. 
 
N.  Further the Bar exams were expressly excluded from th e preview of the Act in 1973. 
Clearly a rule including them again is beyond the r ule -making power of the Ba  Council. 
Whereas in the final report of the 3 member committ ee on reform of legal education it 
has been submitted in its conclusion and recommendation  on page 54 that “The 
Committee is therefore, of the opinion that qualify ing a bar examination should be 
made a requirement prior to admission to the Bar by all State Bar Councils across the 
country.  In light of the decision of the Supreme C ourt in the V. Sudeer case, such a 
requirement may be introduced in the Advocates Act, 1961 by means of a statutory 
amendment.” 
 
O.  Whereas the Supreme Court has in several cases has restri cted a rule making body from 
making rules with retrospective effect. 
 
P.  Whereas Chapter III of Part VI of the Bar Council I ndia Rules bare the intent of being 
rules governing misconduct and discipline and not enro llment conditions as advocates 
as they law no bearings to S.24 and S.30. The intent of the act under s.49 1(ah) is to 
provide penal authority to the bar council for disci plinary proceedings and not powers 
to evaluate the educational quality. 
 
Q.  Whereas the standard of education under S.49 1(j) ca n be affected only if they have 
been approved by the Chief Justice of India. 
 
R.  That the role of examinations can be to the academic /intellectual/physical capability of 
the person undergoing it for which had been provided  for in S.24 sub-section 1 clause 
(d) which has been omitted by Act 60 of 1973,S.18(w. e.f. 31-1-1974). 
 
 
S.  That such a discrimination is only put against students joining the profession and not 
other class of people such as judicial officers who also are permitted to join the 
profession. Taking an exam for the right to practice whereby making an exclusive right 
for the students graduating in the year 2009-2010 or making it mandatory for anyone 
who wishes to join the profession this year. Thereby g iving preferential treatment to 
judicial officer retiring this year or who wish to jo in the profession. 
 
T.  That if the Bar exams are to take place it shall chan ge the definition of Advocate under 
S.2(a) of Advocates Act,1961 also will have change S. 24 Person who may be admitted as 
advocates on State roll. 
 
U.  Whereas the role of the State roll under S.30 and E nrolment under S.24 of the Act shall 
be omitted by the Right to practice by the Bar Coun cil Rules 9 to 11 in Part VI, Chapter III 
of the Bar Council of India Rules – Conditions for Ri ght To Practice – under Section 
49(1)(ah) of the Advocates Act, 1961] giving it authority over the Advocates Act, 1961. 
 
 
 
17. The Petitioner has no other efficacious remedy ex cept to approach this Hon’ble Court. 
 
18. The Petitioner has not filed any other similar p etition either before this Hon’ble Court or 
before the Supreme Court of India. 
19. The Petitioner craves leave of this Hon’ble Cour t to amend or add to the grounds if so 
required. 
20 The Petitioner is a resident in the State of Punja b and his name is on the roles of the Bar 
Council of Punjab and Haryana.   This Hon’ble Court has therefore jurisdiction to entertain and 
try this petition. 
21 There has been no undue delay in filing of this petition. 
22. The requisite court fees of -----------has been affixed on this petition. 
 
 
PRAYER:  
 The Petitioner most humbly prays that this Hon’ble C ourt may be please to:-  
a)  Declare the impugned rules framed by Respondent No. 2   as  invalid, unconstitutional 
and arbitrary;                  
b)  Issue  appropriate writ in the nature of mandamus dire cting the Respondents to grant 
the Right to practice to the Petitioner; and 
c)  Issue any other further order/orders or direction/dire ctions as this Hon’ble Court may 
deem fit and appropriate on the facts and in the cir cumstances of this case. 
 
FOR THIS ACT OF KINDNESS THE PETITIONER ABOVENAMED SHALL EVER PRAY. 
 
         PETITIONER  
 
      THROUGH 
CHANDIGARH       ADVOCATE 
DATED: