LL.B. V Term  
 
 
LB – 502  
Drafting, Pleadings and Conveyance  
 
 
 
Prepared by 
Diksha Munjal Shankar 
Isha Wadhwa Sharma 
Kailash Jeenger 
Pooja Devi 
 
 
 
FACULTY OF LAW,  
UNIVERSITY OF DELHI 
July, 2020 
(For private use only in the course of instruction)  
 ii 
LL.B. V Term 
Paper:  LB – 502 - Drafting , Pleadings  and Conveyance  
Note: This is a kind of practical paper, related to purely procedural aspect of the legal 
profession, wherein it is difficult to explain the concepts theoretically. Depending upon the 
facts of particular matter students, in the capacity of a lawyer, would be required to do 
‘Drafting ’ of: 
 
 various applications, petitions and replies etc. of a particular litigation – which 
constitute part of the court proceedings –falling under ‘Pleadings ’; and  
 documents, reflecting conveyance  of property from one person to another person. 
Depending upon the nature of such dealings/transactions between the parties qua that 
property nomenclature of such a document is done. This part falls under 
‘Conveyancing ’.  
 
In this scenario, the students would be required to undertake, under this subject,  to do these 
practical exercises in the class itself under the guidance of their teacher, af ter recollecting 
what they have learnt in the other substantive subjects during their LL.B. Course . For that 
reason, no specific book is being recommended for the present paper. Therefore, keeping  in 
view the nature of this paper, there is no substitute of class – lectures of the present subject.  
 
 
PURPOSE OF LAW IS TO HAVE PEACE IN THE SOCIETY 
 
It is needless to emphasize the importance of peace in society, since we cannot enjoy life to its 
fullest extent without peace. This aspect is further substantiated in terrorist -stricken world of 
today, where in the agenda of every world leader ‘peace’ finds top priority. In fact, peace 
means and exists when there is no dispute. The dispute arises only when a person claims his 
right over a particular thing and the same is disputed by the other, which creates  tension and 
ultimately leads to breach of peace. Here law plays a very vital and significan t role in the 
society, because through justice delivery system it adjudicates these kinds of  disputes, arising 
out of clash of interests amongst the people. 
 
 
LAW CAN BE SUBSTANTIVE LAW OR PROCEDURAL LAW  
 
The law can be substantive law or procedural law. The substantive law is the one which 
actually decides the rights, liabilities and duties of the respective persons. On t he other hand, 
the procedural law is the one which lays down guidelines as to how to decide those ri ghts, 
liabilities and duties. In other worlds, the procedural law lubricates substantive law. It helps in 
 iii 
determining the rights, liabilities and duties of the litigants. It is pr ocedural law which puts 
life into the substantive law by providing remedy for enforcement of those rig hts and 
liabilities. In this way, both the branches of law are complementary to each other and a t the 
same time independent of each other. Indian Penal Code, 1860, Customs Act, 1962, 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act,1954, Sale of Goods Act, 1930,Transfer of Pr operty Act, 
1982 and Rent Control Legislations, etc. are the examples of substantive laws, whereas Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Indian Evidence Act, 1872, etc. 
are procedural laws. However, there are certain laws, regarding which, due to the nature of  
their provisions and the object, for which they were legislated, it is difficu lt to point out as to 
whether they are substantive laws or procedural laws. In such cases, on one hand the 
provision of such a law provides procedure for enforcement of certain rights and at the same 
time violation of that procedure leads to taking away of that substantive right  of the violator. 
For example, under the Registration Act, 1908 if a particular document, which requires 
compulsory registration, is not registered then the party to that document, cla iming right on 
the strength of the contents of the said document would not be able to establish hi s 
substantive right under that unregistered instrument.  
 
 
PLEADINGS 
 
It would be beneficial to distinguish between the pleadings and conveyancing. The dictiona ry 
meaning of the term ‘plead ’ means ‘to state and argue a case ’. Therefore, pleading comprises 
of respective contentions of the parties in a dispute, which are reduced into writ ing. 
‘Pleadings ’, under Civil as well as Criminal Law, meant that to determine what th e parties 
were currently fighting about. Pleading is the beginning stage of a lawsuit in whi ch parties 
formally submit their claims and defences. In Civil proceedings the plaintiff su bmits a plaint 
stating the cause of action -- the issue or issues in controversy. The defendant submits an 
answer- the reply- the written statement- stating his or her defences and deni als. In other 
words it is nothing but the formal presentation of claims and defences by parties t o a lawsuit. 
Therefore, it includes every legal document filed in a lawsuit, petition, motion and/or he aring, 
including complaint, petition, answer/reply, rejoinder, motion, declaration and mem orandum 
of points and authorities (written argument citing precedents and statutes). 
 Hence, the term pleading would be applicable to the Court proceedings includi ng 
filing of the complaint/plaint, etc., replies thereto and other incidental documents related to 
the dispute filed by either of the parties. Needless to mention here that, our  legal system is 
adversary legal system wherein there are two contesting parties. One party stakes i ts claim or 
right to a particular thing, which is disputed by the opposite side befor e the Court. Under 
these circumstances each of the parties in support of its claim files in writing  various 
contentions and submissions in terms of the different provisions under the law before t he 
Court. All these documents constitute pleadings. It is only after the completion of  the 
pleadings that a matter is argued and subsequently the dispute is adjudicated by the Court.  
Under this part of the subject we would be learning drafting of various k inds of pleadings, as 
mentioned in the syllabus.   
 
 iv 
CONVEYANCING  
 
On the other hand the dictionary meaning of the ’conveyance ’ is ‘an act by which property is 
conveyed or voluntarily transferred from one person to another by means of a w ritten 
statement and other formalities ’. It also means ‘instrument ’ itself. Therefore, the term 
conveyancing does not apply to the Court proceedings, rather it is applicable to the 
instrument, which have been documented not for the purpose of Court proceedings, rather for 
the purpose of creating evidence of a particular transaction, which may be used bef ore the 
Court in case of any dispute. So broadly speaking the pleading and conveyancing may be 
distinguished by simply stating that while the pleadings are applicable to Cour t proceedings 
and conveyancing is applicable to the documentation done outside the Court and not meant 
for the Court proceedings particularly, though they may be used in the Court pr oceeding, in 
order to substantiate a particular contention, claim or submission. Under this  part of the 
subject we would be learning drafting of diverse documents, reflecting diffe rent kinds of 
transactions between the parties, as mentioned in the syllabus.   
 
 
Prescribed Books: 
1. M.C. Agarwal and G.C. Mogha, Mogha ’s Law of Pleadings in India  
(17th ed., 2006)   
2. M.R. Mallick, Ganguly ’s, Civil Court: Practice and Procedure  (13th ed., 2005)  
 
Prescribed Legislation: 
The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Orders VI to VIII  
 
 v 
PART - A: PLEADINGS 
 
I. DRAFTING RULES & SKILLS            1-9  
  
 
II. FORMS OF PLEADINGS 
CIVIL PLEADINGS  
 1.  Suit for recovery under Order XXXVII of  the Code of Civil 
Procedure 1908                                                                            10-12 
2.  Draft Affidavit                                                                                   13  
1. 3.  Suit for Permanent Injunction                                                       14-16              
2. 4.  Application for Temporary Injunction Under Order XXXIX Rules 1 
and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908                                  17-18  
3. 5.  Application under Order XXXIX, Rule 2-A of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908                                                                            19-20 
6. Application under Order XXXIII read with Section 151 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure to sue as an Indigent Person.                                    21  
4. 7.  Suit for Ejectment and Damages for Wrongful Use and  
Occupation                                                                                    22-24 
8.  Suit for Specific Performance of Contract                                     25-26  
9.  Model Draft Written Statement                                                     27-29 
10. Caveat under section 148-A of the Code of Civil  
     Procedure, 1908                                                                            30 
11.  Transfer Petition (Civil) U/s 25 of the Civil Procedure 
      Code, 1908                                                                              31-35 
12. Application for the Execution of Decree                                   36-37 
 
 
MATRIMONIAL PLEADINGS  
   
13. Petitions under the Matrimonial Pleadings-Introduction           38-39 
14. Petition for Restitution of Conjugal Rights under   
    Section 9  of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955                             40-41  
15. Petition for Judicial Separation under Section 10 
     of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955                                             42-43  
16. Petition for Dissolution of Marriage by Decree of Divorce 
      under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955                44-46  
17. Petition for Dissolution of Marriage by Decree of Divorce  
    under Section 13B(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955           47-48 
18. Draft affidavit for matrimonial pleadings                                      49 
 
 
PLEADINGS UNDER INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925  
 vi 
  
19. Petition for Grant of Probate in High Court                              50-52  
20. Petition for Grant of Letters of Administration                         53-55 
21. Petition for Grant of Succession Certificate                              56-57 
 
PETITONS UNDER CONSTITUTIONAL LAW  
 
22. Writ Petition- Meaning                                                             58-60 
23. Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India     61-62 
24. Writ Petition (Cri.) for Enforcement of Fundamental Rights    63-66 
25. Special Leave Petition (Civil) under Article 136 of the  
    Constitution    of India                                                              67-70 
26. Special Leave Petition (Criminal ) under Article 136  
    of the Constitution of India                                                       71-74 
 
PLEADINGS UNDER CRIMINAL LAW  
27. Application for Regular Bail                                                     75-76 
28. Application for Anticipatory Bail                                              77-78 
29. Complaint under section 138 of the Negotiable  
    Instruments Act, 1881                                                              79-80 
30. Application under section 125 of the Code of Criminal  
    Procedure, 1972                                                                       81-82                
 
 
OTHER MISCELLANEOUS PLEADINGS  
 
31. Complaint under Section 12 of Consumer Protection Act, 1986 
                                                                                                      83-85 
32. Contempt Petition under Section 11 and 12 of The Contempt of   
Courts Act, 1971                                                                           86-87 
33. Petition under section 12 of  Domestic Violence            
    Act, 2005                                                                                   88-90 
  
  
 vii 
PART B : CONVEYANCING 
Prescribed Book: 
1. J.M. Srivastava and G.C. Mogha, Mogha ’s The Indian Conveyancer (13th ed., 2004 )  
2. C.R. Datta and M.N. Das, De Souza ’s, Forms and Precedents of  Conveyancing    
        (13th ed., 1999) 
I. COMPONENT PARTS OF A DEED                       91-99 
                                        
II. FORMS OF DEEDS AND NOTICES   
1. Will          100-102 
2. General Power of Attorney       103-104 
3. Special Power of Attorney to execute Sale Deed             105 
4. Agreement to sell        106-108 
5. Sale Deed         109-111 
6. Lease Deed         112-115 
7. Mortgage Deed         116-117 
8. Partnership Deed        118-119 
9. Deed of Dissolution of Partnership       120-121 
10. Relinquishment Deed        122-123 
11. Gift Deed         124-126 
12. Notice under section 106 of The Transfer of Property Act, 1882          127 
13. Notice under section 80 of Civil Procedure Code, 1908   128-129 
14. Notice under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 130-131 
15. Reply to Legal Notice under Section 138 of Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881         132-133 
 
 
The forms of pleadings/deeds enlisted above are only illustrative and not exhaustiv e. The 
pleadings/deeds are to be drafted on different grounds/facts. 
 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE:    
1. The topics and cases given above are not exhaustive. The teachers teaching the course  
shall be at liberty to add new topics/cases. 
2. The students are required to study the legislations as amended up- to-date and consult 
the latest editions of books. 
1 
 
DRAFTING RULES & SKILLS 
 
Drafting in general means, putting one ’s own ideas in writing. Drafting of any matter is an art. 
Drafting of legal matters requires greater skills and efficiencies. It  requires thorough 
knowledge of law, procedure, settled judicial principles, besides proficiency in English 
language. A perfect drafting of matters in relation to suits, applications, complaints, writ 
petition, appeals, revision, reviews and other such matters connected therewith shall 
obviously lead to good result in terms of money, time, energy and expectation of not  only the 
learned members of the Bench, but also the Bar as well as the parties to the l itigation. It 
creates a congenial atmosphere where the glory of the judiciary and the Law grows to  sky-
heights. So is the case with regard to the drafting of conveyance/deeds. 
 
Drafting, Pleadings and Conveyance (DPC) is made as a compulsory practical subject 
forming part of the curriculum of the Law Course in India. It envisages, inter alia, drafting of 
civil pleadings; criminal complaints and other proceedings; writ petition, a ppeal-civil, 
criminal; and also SLP; contempt petition, interlocutory applications, etc. A studen t who 
acquires the requisite knowledge, perfection and proficiency in drafting of these matt ers, shall 
undoubtedly become a perfect legal professional.  
 
History of Pleadings  
The method of arriving at an issue by alternate allegations has been pract ised in the civilized 
countries from earliest times. The art of pleadings apparently is as ancient as  any portion of 
our procedural law. In ancient India it certainly existed but not in the present f orm. The art of 
pleading is also traceable in substantially the same form in England in the day s of Henry II. 
The “issue ” was found in the first year of the reign of Edward II. It shows that the art of 
arriving at an issue was not only practised during the reign of Edward II but had been 
practised even before “for an issue had not been only the constant effect, but the professed 
aim and the object of pleading ”.  At first the pleadings were oral. The parties actually 
appeared in person in open Court and oral altercation took place in the presence of the judges. 
These oral pleading were conducted either by the party himself or by a person who was an 
eloquent orator and well versed in Dharma Sastras and Koran   whom people generally called 
Pandit  and Maulvi  in ancient and medieval India respectively. In English countries such 
person was called narrator  and advocates before the adoption of this present lawyers ’ 
institution. The Pandits, Maulvis and narrators helped Kings and Judges in the administration 
of justice in those days.  
 
The duty of the King and the judge was to superindent i.e. to ‘moderate ’ the oral contentions 
conducted before him. His aim was to arrive at some specific point or matter aff irmed on th e 
one side, and denied on the other, and accordingly the parties were said to be ‘at issue ’ and 
the pleadings were over. The parties, then, were ready to go before a jury if it were at issue. In 
those days the judges were very strict and they never allowed more than one issue in r espect 
of each cause of action. When a defendant has more than one defence to the plaintiff ’s claim 
 2      
he had to elect one out of the defences. Since the reign of Queen Victoria the parties were 
allowed to raise more than a single issue, either of law or fact.  
 
During Viva voce altercation an officer of the court was busy writing on a parchment roll an 
official report of the allegation of the parties along with the act of C ourt which together was 
called record. As the suit proceeded similar entries were made from time t o time and on the 
completion of the proceedings, the roll was preserved as perpetual judicial record . When each 
pleader in turn started borrowing parchment roll and entered his statement thereon himself , 
the oral pleading fell into disuse on the obvious defect. Later, with the development of print 
machinery, paper etc. the method of drawing up the pleading on the plain paper and their 
interchange between parties started and this happened probably in the reign of Edward IV . 
The Judicature Act 1873 in England brought in many reforms in the realms of pleading . The 
modern Indian law of pleading like any other law is based on English system. Civil p leading 
is governed by the Code of Civil Procedure which lawyer has to master over for the t horough 
knowledge of practice and procedure required in a civil litigation.  
 
Meaning of Pleadings  
 
Pleadings are the statement  of facts in writing drawn up and filed in a cour t by each party to 
the case stating therein what  his contention shall be at the trial and giving al l such details as 
his opponent will need to know in order to prepare his case in answer. In India there are only 
two pleadings in a suit as defined under Order 6, rule 1 of the Code of Civil Proc edure, it says 
that pleading means “Plaint or Written Statement ”. This definition is not very clear in itself. 
The plaint and written statement are defined as: 
 
(a) Plaint: A statement of claims, called the “plaint ”  in  which the plaintiff sets out his cause 
of action with all necessary particulars; and  
(b) Written Statement: A statement of defences, called the “written statement ” which the 
defendant deals with every material fact alleged by the Plaintiff in the plai nt and also sets any 
new facts which tells in his favour, adding such objection as he wishes to take to the claim. 
Beside the plaint and the written statement, other pleadings that may be file d, may be divided 
under two heads: (i) subsequent pleadings, and (ii) additional pleadings.  
(i)Subsequent Pleadings: The only subsequent pleading which is filed as a matter of right, 
without the leave of the court, is a written statement of a plainti ff by way of defence to a plea 
of set-off set up by a defendant in the written statement of his defences. No ot her pleading 
subsequent to the written statement of a defendant other than that by way of defence  to a plea 
of set off can be presented except with the leave of the court and upon such t erms as the court 
may think proper. But the court may at any time require a written statement or an additional 
written statement from any of the parties and fix a time for presenting the same (O.8, r.9). Any 
ground of defence which has arisen after the institution of the suit or the pre sentation of the 
written statement, may be, raised by the plaintiff or the defendant as the c ase may be, in his 
 3      
written statement (O.8, r.9). This is also a subsequent pleading. The subsequent pleadi ng, i.e., 
this written statement in some states is also termed as “replication ”. This term was formerly 
used in England where plaintiff ’s written statement is now called “reply ”. 
(ii) Additional Pleading : Although no pleading subsequent to the written statement of a 
defendant other than by way of defence to a plea of set-off can be presented wi thout the leave 
of the court, yet the court may at any time require a written statement or addi tional written 
statement from any of the parties, i.e., plaintiff or defendant or both (O.8, r.8). The additional 
pleadings are not subsequent pleadings in the true sense of the term. They are pleading  by 
way of further and better statement of the nature of the claim or defence or  further and better 
particular of any matter in the pleadings. These pleading may be ordered under order 6, rule 5 
of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
Under the English Law, pleading has been defined as follows: “pleading includes any petition 
or summons and also include the statement in writing of the claim or demand of any pla intiff 
and of the defence of any defendant thereto and of reply of the plaintiff to any c ounter-claim 
of a defendant. ” 
Function and Object of Pleadings  
The object of pleadings is to assist the court and the parties to the dispute i n its adjudication.  
Stable. J., in Pinson v. Lloyds Bank Ltd., (1941) 2 K.B. 72, has expressed the function of 
pleading in the following words: 
 
“The function of a pleading is not simply for the benefit of the parties a nd perhaps primarily 
for the assistance of a Court by defining with precision the area beyond whi ch without the 
leave of the court, and consequential amendment of pleading, conflict must not be allow ed to 
extend. ” 
The object of pleading is to give a fair notice to each party of what t he opponent ’s case is to; 
ascertain with precision, the points on which the parties agree and those on which  they differ 
and thus to bring the parties to a definite issue. The purpose of pleading is also eradicating 
irrelevancy. The parties, thus themselves know what are the matters left in disput e and what 
facts they have to prove at the trial. They are saved from the expense and trouble of  calling 
evidence which may prove unnecessary in view of the admission of the opposite party. And 
further, by knowing before hand, what point the opposite party raise at the tr ial they are 
prepared to meet them and are not taken by surprise. 
  
Truly speaking the object of the pleading is to narrow down the controversy of the parties to 
definite issue. The sole object of pleadings is that each side may be fully active to the question  
that are about to be argued in order that they may have an opportunity of bringing forwar d 
such evidence as may be appropriate to the issues. The court has no power to disregar d the 
pleading and reach conclusions that they think are just and proper. 
 
 4      
A select committee of eminent lawyers having knowledge of Indian conditions was ap pointed 
to frame the present Code of Civil Procedure which has been amended and redrafted in 1976. 
Order 6, 7 and 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure  are very important from the point of view 
of drafting of pleading s. Appendix A to the Code of Civil Procedure  contains some model 
form of pleadings which are useful.  
 
The pleading should always be drawn up and conducted in such manner so as to evolve some 
clear and definite issues i.e., some definite propositions of law and/or fact, asser ted by one 
party and denied by the other. But both the parties must agree on the points sought to be 
adjudicated upon in action. When this has been fairy and properly ascertained then following 
advantages flow from pleadings: 
 
(i) It is for the benefit of the parties to know exactly what are the matters lef t in dispute. They 
may discover that they are fighting about nothing at all; e.g. when a plai ntiff in an action of 
libel finds that the defendant does not assert that the words are true, he i s often willing to 
accept an apology and costs, and so put an end to the action.  
(ii) It is also a boon to the parties to know precisely what facts they must prove at t he trial; 
otherwise, they may go through great trouble and expense in procuring evidence o f facts 
which their opponent does not dispute. On the other hand, if they assume that th eir opponent 
will not raise such and such a point, they may be taken suddenly by surprise at the trial. 
(iii) Moreover, it is necessary to ascertain the nature of the controversy in order to determine 
the most appropriate mode of trial. It may turn out to be a pure point of law, which should be 
decided by judge.  
(iv) It is desirable to place on record the precise question raised in the action s o that the 
parties or their successor may not fight the same battle over and again. 
Fundamental Rules of Pleadings  
 
The English law of pleading has got four fundamental rules of pleading upon wh ich Order 6 
of the Code of Civil Procedure is based which are set out as under: 
 
1. Every pleading must state facts and not law. 
2. It must state all material facts and material facts only. 
3. It must state only the facts on which the party ’s pleading relies and not the evidence by 
which they are to be proved; and  
4. It must state such facts concisely, but with precision and certainty.  
 
(1) Facts, not law  
 
The first fundamental rule is that neither provisions of law nor conclusions of law should be 
alleged in a pleading. The pleading should be confined to facts only and it is for the j udge to 
 5      
draw such interference from those facts as are permissible under the law of whi ch he is bound 
to take judicial notice.  
 
Illustration: 
It will not be sufficient to state that ‘Abu Mohammad made a gift of his property ’ to the 
plaintiff. The plaintiff should allege here the gift was made, how it was  accepted and how 
possession was delivered; because these are the facts which constitute a valid gift  under 
Muslim Law. To allege that ‘Abu Mohammad made a gift ’ will be a conclusion of law from 
the facts which are not to be state directly in the pleading.  
 
In a suit for damages for negligence, it is not enough for the plaintiff to stat e that the 
defendant has been guilty of negligence ’ without showing how and in what respect he was 
negligence and how he became bound to use due care to prevent an injury to other.  
 
When then defendant has to reply to the claim of the plaintiff in a money suit, it is not 
sufficient for him to state that ‘the defendant does not owe to the plaintiff ’. But he must allege 
such fact which goes to prove that in the circumstances the defendant does not owe to the  
plaintiff. The defendant shou ld state that he never borrowed from the plaintiff, or good were 
never ordered, or were never delivered, or that they were not equal to the sample. 
 
It is not sufficient in a suit upon a contract for the defendant to, merely, plead th e ‘the contract 
is rescinded ’, the defendant must plead in what manner and by what means he contends that is 
was rescinded. 
 
The reason for not mentioning the law in the pleading is that it is the du ty of the court to find 
out and examine all plea of Law that may be applicable to the facts of the case.  However, t he 
parties can make their submission about law any time. For example, the non maintainability 
of the suit which is a point of law can be urged although no specific plea has been raise d in 
the pleading. The rule that every pleading must state facts and not law or an  interference of 
law has got following exceptions: 
 
(a) Foreign Laws:   The courts do not take any judicial notice of foreign laws and hence they 
must be pleaded as facts. The status of the foreign country intended to be relied upon should  
be set-forth as substantially as any other facts. . 
(b) Mixed question of Laws and facts:   Where a question is one of mixed law and fact, it is 
permissible and proper to plead both the facts and the legal conclusion. For instance, the  
defendant may say that the suit is barred by the law of limitation, or he may say he is entitled 
to set off after narrating the facts on which he bases his conclusions.  
(c) Condition precedent:  The Code of Civil Procedure provides that any condition precedent 
the performance of which is intended to be contested shall be distinctly specifi ed in the 
pleading of the plaintiff or defendant (Order 6 r.6 of C.P.C.), as for instance, the  legality of the 
notice under section 80, C.P.C.  
(d) Custom and Usage of Trades : Custom and usage of any trade and business shall be 
pleaded like any other facts, if a party wants to rely on them. But a custom repeate dly brought 
 6      
before Court and recognised by them regularly is deemed to have acquired the force of law 
and need not be pleaded. For example, an occupancy tenant is entitled by local custom and 
usage to cut trees growing upon his holding it is not necessary for the occupan cy tenant to 
plead this custom, if he wishes to rely on this right to cut the trees . Similarly, a party who 
wishes to rely on the usage of a particular trade and business and if it is at v ariance with any 
provision of the Contract Act, he must not plead the usage of such trade and business w ith its 
detailed incident. If it is not pleaded, no evidence to prove it shall be admitted. 
(e) The facts of negligence, right or liability, unlawful or wrongful act should be 
specifically pleade d. Every plea of fact should be specifically raised and proved.  
 
(2) Material facts  
The second fundamental rule of pleading is that every pleading shall contain only a st atement 
of material facts on which the party pleading relies for his claim or defence. This rule has 
been enunciated in Order 6, Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The omission to obse rve 
this rule may increase the difficulty in the Court ’s task of ascertaining the rights of the parties.   
 
Now, the question arises what are material facts ?  
 
The facts which are essential to the plaintiff ’s cause of action or to the defendant ’s defence. I t 
can be said that fact is material for the pleading of a party which he is bound to  prove at the 
trial unless admitted by the other party before he can succeed in his claim or defence. If one is 
in reasonable doubt about a particular fact as a material fact it is better for him to plead that 
fact rather than omit it because unless a fact is pleaded he shall not be allowed t o prove it at 
the hearing of the suit. A plea of fraud and misrepresentation in a suit must set  forth full 
particulars of fraud and misrepresentation, because these particulars constitute mate rial facts 
unless raised by the plaintiff or the defendant in his pleading, he will not be a llowed to prove 
at the trial .  
 
Of course, a material fact can be inserted in the pleading by amendment which is  the right of 
the plaintiff and defendant; but when a pleading is amended one is likely to be saddled wit h 
the cost of other side. When suit is brought under a particular statute, al l facts which are 
necessary to bring the suit under the statue must be alleged. When a rule of l aw applicable to 
a case has an exception to it, all facts are material which tends to take the ca se out of the rule 
or out of exception. For instance: 
 
(1) If a childless Mohammedan widow claims one-fourth share in the property of her husb and 
as allowed by Shia law, she must allege that her husband was a Shia. 
(2)Where a plaintiff claims an alternative relief, he must plead facts entitling hi m, for such 
relief. 
(3) Where the question of age or time affects the right of the parties, the facts s hould be 
specifically pleaded. 
(4) Where a plaintiff sues on the basis of a title he must state the na ture of the deed from 
which he has derived title. 
 7      
(5) The plea that a woman claiming maintenance has lost her right due to co ntinuous 
desertion or living in adultery should be specifically raised. 
(6) Where the plea is based on custom, it must be stated in the precise form what the custom 
is. For instance, if a childless Mohammedan widow claims one-fourth share in the proper ty of 
her husband as allowed by Shia Law, she must allege that her husband was a Shia.  
The following are exception to this fundamental rule of pleading.  
(a) Content of documents:  Whenever the contents of document are material, it shall be 
sufficient in any pleading to state the effect thereof as briefly as possibl e without setting out 
whole or any part thereof unless any precise words thereof are material.  
Foe instance, if plaintiff ’s claim is based on a sale-deed, it is sufficient to state that “defendant 
has sold the property to the property to the plaintiff by a sale-deed dated...... ” 
(b) Matters of Inducement:  It means introductory or prefatory facts which should be stated in 
the first and second paras in the body of the plaint or written statement. Though it  is not 
necessary yet sometimes it is desirable to commence a plaint with some introd uctory 
allegations stating who the parties are, what business they carry on how they are r elated and 
connected and other surrounding circumstances leading up to the dispute. Though thes e are 
not material facts yet these are allowed in England and hence in India too. But the m atter of 
inducement should be reduced to the minimum need. 
 (3) Facts, Not Evidence 
 
The third fundamental rule of pleading has been laid down by Order 6, rule 2 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure. It says that every pleading must contain a statement of materia l facts but not 
the evidence by which they are to be proved. The material facts on which a party rel ies are 
called Facta Prabanda, i.e. the facts to be proved, and they should be stated in the pleadings. 
The evidence or facts by which Facta Probanda  are to be proved are called Facts Probantia, 
and they are not to be stated in the pleadings. Facta Probanda  are not the facts in issue but 
only relevant facts which will be proved at the trial in order to established fact s in issue. For 
instance, in a suit of damages for malicious prosecution the plaintiff should only allege in the 
plaint that the defendant was actuated by malice in prosecuting him. He must not allege that 
he had previously given evidence against the defendant and the defendant had vowed to tak e 
revenge. The plaintiff is by all means entitled to tender evidence to prove this fa ct. Secondly, 
in a policy of life insurance, the condition that the policy shall be void, if t he holder dies of 
his own hand, in the defence it is not necessary to state that the assured brought t he pistol a 
few days before his death and made all preparation to kill himself. It is suffici ent to state in 
defence that the assured died of his own hand. In some cases where the facts in issue and 
relevant facts are so mixed up that it is very difficult to separate them and if  it is so the 
relevant facts may be  stated. For example, where custom is based on village administratio n 
paper, which is the basis of claim and its sole proof. In such cases the record has to be 
pleaded.  
 
(4) Concise Form with Precision and Certainty  
 8      
The material facts must be stated in a summary form, succinctly and in a strict ch ronological 
order. All unnecessary allegations and their details should be omitted in order to att ain brevity 
in pleadings. Pleading is not a place for fine writing but only assertion of  hard facts. It is 
desirable to go straight to the point and state fact, boldly, clearly and concisely and to avoid 
all paraphrasing and all circumlocutions. As far as possible an active voice sho uld be 
preferred to passive in pleading. The same person or thing should be called by the same nam e 
throughout the pleading. The pleading shall be divided into paragraph numbered 
consecutively. Dates sums and numbers shall be expressed in figures, even though the 
pleading should be concise, it should never be obscure. It should be both concise, as well as  
precise. The parties cannot change the case and get the relief. 
 
A good pleader should bear in mind the following points in relation to a pleading: 
 
i.  Describe the names and places accurately and spell them correctly and adopt the 
same spelling throughout. 
ii.  One should always avoid the use of pronoun as ‘He’, ‘She’, ‘This’, or ‘That’. The 
plaintiff or the defendant should not be addressed by their names at some place and at some  
place by the word ‘Plaintiff ’ and ‘ defendant ’, call them throughout your pleading by the 
expression ‘the plaintiff ’ and ‘the defendant ’ as the case may be. Where one has to distinguish 
between two or more plaintiffs or defendants, they can be referred to as ‘the plaintiff 
Ramashankar ’ or ‘the defendant-Hariharan ’ as the case may be. 
iii.  A lawyer should allege all facts boldly and plainly. He should use the language of the 
document or the act itself; and he should not invent his own language however correct it  may 
be, e.g. of a policy becomes void in case, “the assured shall die of his own hand. ” Now, inthis 
case while drafting the pleading instead “ the assured killed himself ” or he committed 
suicide, ” plead that “the assured died of his own hand. ” 
iv.  A lawyer should allege all facts boldly and plainly. He should avoid ifs and buts . As 
far as possible complex sentences should also be avoided. Facts should not be repeated. 
Pleading should be divided into separate paragraphs and as far as possible only one fact 
should be contained by one paragraph embodying all necessary particulars in the pleading. 
v.  Every pleading shall be signed by the party and his advocate and, if the party is 
unable to sign the pleading it may be signed by this agent. 
vi.  Every pleading shall be verified by the party or the parties. Verification can also be 
made by any other person if acquainted with the facts of pleadings. False verifica tion is an 
offence punishable by the Indian Penal Code. 
vii.  In cases where a corporation is a party, pleading may be verified by Secretary or by  
the director or by any other principal officer of that corporation who is ab le to depose the 
facts of the case. In verification clause one should denote according to the numbers of 
paragraph what he verified outy of his own knowledge and what he verified upon the 
information received and believed to be true.  
 
Alternative Pleas: 
 
 9      
Law does not prohibit a plaintiff from relying on several distinct and different rights in the 
alternative or a defendant from raising as many distinct and separate defences  as he like. For 
example, a plaintiff may sue for possession of a house belonging to A, as an adopted son of 
A, and in the alternative under a will executed by A in the plaintiff ’s favour. A plaintiff may 
claim proprietary right in a land, or, in the alternative easementary ri ght in an action for pre-
emption the defendant is not prohibited from setting up a plea of estoppels in a ddition to a 
plea of denial of custom of pre-emption. A Hindu person claiming under a sale deed fr om a 
Hindu widow may support his claim by pleading that the widow separated during the life time 
of her husband and hence she was the owner of the property which she had sold to him, or in 
the alternative the widow was in possession for over 12 years and thus became owner  by 
adverse possession. 
 
A defendant in money suit due on promissory note against him may plead that he d id not 
execute the promissory note, and in the alternative the plaintiff clai m is barred by the law of 
limitation. But it must be carefully borne in mind by the draftsman and separ ately be stated in 
the pleading. The court will not allow any such pleas on the ground covered by impl ication 
unless specifically set out. Thus, in a suit by a son to set aside certain t ransfers made by his 
mother on the ground of unsoundness of mind of his mother at the time or the transf er and 
further averred that the donee was residing with his mother and was completely under his 
dominion and control and the donee knew the mental condition of the donor.  
 
 
********* 
10 
 
CIVIL PLEADINGS 
SUIT FOR RECOVERY UNDER ORDER XXXVII OF CPC   
 
IN THE COURT OF DISTRICT JUDGE (DISTRICT __________). ROHINI COURT, 
DELHI  
SUIT NO ……………. OF    20..  
(SUIT UNDER ORDER XXXVII OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908) 
 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
M/s ABC Pvt. Ltd. 
A Company Incorporated Under the  
Companies Act, Having Its Registered Office  
At ………, New Delhi.     
Through its Director 
Shri……………………  
       ……….. PLAINTIFF  
VERSUS 
M/s XYZ Ltd. 
A Company Incprporated Under The  
Companies Act. Having Its Registered Office  
At ……….,  Delhi                 
Through its Director 
Shri……………………                  …….. DEFENDANT  
 
 
SUIT FOR RECOVERY OF RS. 4, 19,200/-(Four lakh nineteen thousand two hundred 
Only) UNDER ORDER XXXVII OF CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908  
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the Plaintiff is a Company constituted under the Companies Act having its register ed 
office at B-40, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi. Mr. P. Executive Director of the Pla intiff is a 
duly constituted attorney of the Plaintiff and is authorized and competent to sig n and verify 
the plaint, vakalatnama etc. and to institute this suit on behalf of the Plaintiff. 
2. That the Plaintiff carries on the business of construction, engineering and desi gning. The 
Plaintiff is a builder of international repute and has earned a big name in its business. 
3. That the Defendant is a Company incorporated under the Companies Act having their 
registered office at …… Chandigarh.  
4. That the Defendant approached the Plaintiff for construction of a building for their paper 
mill at Chand igarh some time in the year …. . 
 11    
5. That the plaintiff and the defendant entered into an agreement for the construction of  a 
building a sper the site plan and specifications. 
6. That the Plaintiff constructed the building and handed over the possession of the same t o 
the Defe ndant sometime in….. .(date). 
7. That on ………(date) , the Plaintiff raised the final bill for Rs. 4,19,200/- on the 
Defendant on account of the construction of their paper mill at Chandigarh agai nst which the 
Defendant handed over c heque No. 213456 dated ……..(date)  for Rs. 4,19,200/- drawn on 
Punjab National Bank, Shahdara, Delhi to the Plaintiff. 
8. That the cheque was presented by the Plaintiff, however the same was dishonoured upon 
presentation vide bank memo dated……     
9. That the Plaintiff immediately informed the Defendant about the dishonour of the sai d 
cheque and called upon the Defendant to make the payment of the said amount along with 
interest @ 18% per annum. However, the Defendant failed to pay the same to the Plaintiff 
despite repeated requests and reminders. 
10. That the Plaintiff therefore finally issued a legal notice dated …….(date) to the Defendant 
calling upon the Defendant to clear the outstanding amount of Rs. 1,39,492/- along wit h 
interest at the rate of 18% per annum w.e.f. ……..(date)  upto the date of payment. However, 
no payment has been made by the Defendant despite the said notice. 
11. That the Defendant is now liable to pay a sum of Rs. 4,19,200/- along with interest  @ 
18% per annum from the date on the Plaintiff ’s bill. The Plaintiff is, claiming interest 
from……(date)  upto the date of filing of this suit @ 18% per annum. 
12. That the cause of action in favour of the Plaintiff and against the Defendant fir st arose in 
2000 when the Plaintiff was approached by the Defendant for construction of their paper mill. 
It further arose in ……..  when the said building was completed and handed over to the 
Defendant and on …….  when the Plaintiff submitted the final bill for Rs. 4,19,200/- to the 
Defendant. The cause of action arose on all dates when the Plaintiff called upon the 
Defendant to make the payment and the later failed to comply with it. The cause of  action is 
still subsisting as the Defendant has failed to pay the outstanding amount despite repeated oral 
and written requests and reminders from the Plaintiff. 
13. The suit is within the period of limitation. 
14. This Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to entertain this suit because the part of t he cause of 
action arose at Delhi. The contract for construction of the paper mill was en tered at Delhi, all 
the payments upto this date have been made at Delhi and the payment of the outstanding 
amount was also to be made at Delhi. The Administrative Office of the Defendan t is situated 
at Delhi where they carry on the work for their gain. 
15. The value of this suit for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction is Rs. - -------- on 
which court fee of Rs. ___________is paid. 
16. That this suit is filed under Order XXXVII of the Code of Civil Procedure and no relief 
has been claimed which does not fall within the ambit of Order XXXVII. 
 
 12    
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to :- 
 (a) Pass a decree for Rs. 4,19,200/-(Four Lakhs Nineteen Thousand and Two   
Hundred only) with interest @ 18% per annum from ……(date)  upto the date of filing the suit 
in favour of the Plaintiff and against the Defendant; 
(b) award pendentlite and future interest at the rate of 18% per annum on the above stated 
amount of Rs. 4,19,200/-(Four Lakhs Nineteen Thousand and Two Hundred only) with 
interes t @ 18% per annum from …..(date)  upto the date of filing the suit in favour of the 
Plaintiff and against the Defendant; 
 (c) award cost of the suit in favour of the Plaintiff and against the Defendant; and  
 (d) pass such other and further order(s) as may be deemed fit and proper on the  
  facts and in the circumstances of this case. 
 
                                                                                                        Plaintiff  
Place:                              Through              
Date:                                                   Advocate 
 
VERIFICATION: 
Verified at Delhi on this 1st day of  January 20… that the contents of paras 1 to …  of the 
plaint are true to my knowledge derived from the records of the Plaintiff maint ained in the 
ordinary course o f its business, those of paras ….  to .... are true on information received and 
believed to be true and last para is the humble prayer to this Hon ’ble Court. 
         
 Plaintiff  
 
[NOTE : The above plaint  must be supported by an Affidavit] 
 
Note: A student should mention the correct paragraphs in the verification and also focu s on 
territorial and pecuniary jurisdiction. 
* * * * * 
  
 13    
DRAFT AFFIDAVIT 
 
 
IN THE COURT OF DISTRICT JUDGE (DISTRICT __________)  DELHI  
SUIT NO ……………. OF    20..  
(SUIT UNDER ORDER XXXVII OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908) 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
M/s ABC Pvt. Ltd. 
A Company Incorporated Under The  
Companies Act, Having Its Registered Office  
At New Delhi.     
Through its Director 
Shri……………………  
       ……….. PLAINTIFF  
VERSUS 
M/s XYZ Ltd. 
A Company Incprporated Under The  
Companies Act. Having Its Registered 
Office At   Delhi                 
Through its Director 
Shri……………………                  …….. DEFENDANT  
 
AFFIDAVIT OF Sh………, S/O. …………………, AGED ABOUT 38 YEARS, 
R/O…………. in the capacity of the director of M/S ABC Pvt. Ltd.. 
 
I, …………..the deponent hereinabove do hereby solemnly affirm and state hereunder:  
1. I say that I am the Authorized Representative / Director of the Plaint iff and I am 
aware of the facts and circumstances of the present suit based upon the records of the Plaintiff 
maintained in the ordinary course of business and I am duly authorized and competent to 
swear and file the present suit and affidavit.  
2. I say that the accompanying Suit has been drafted and filed by my counsel upon my 
instructions and contents of the same are true and correct. 
3. I say that the documents filed along with plaint are true copies of originals. 
 
DEPONENT 
VERIFICATION: 
I, ………, do hereby verify on this ____day of January, 2017 at Delhi that the contents of the 
above said affidavit are true and correct to my knowledge and information and nothi ng 
material has been concealed therefrom.                                                  
                                     DEPONENT 
* * * * * 
 14    
SUIT FOR PERMANENT INJUNCTION 
IN THE COURT OF SENIOR CIVIL JUDGE (DISTRICT ___________), DELHI 
SUIT NO. ____________   OF   20.. 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
Sh. Om Veer Singh  
S/o. ___________-,  
R/o. Sainik Nagar, New Delhi                .… PLAINTIFF  
VERSUS 
1. Dr. U. Basu  
S/o________, 
R/o Pragati Vihar Society, Delhi - 92 
2. Tapan Kumar, 
S/o ______ 
R/o Pragati Vihar Society, Delhi – 92                      ….. DEFENDANTS  
SUIT FOR PERMANENT INJUNCTION 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the plaintiff is the permanent resident of the above mentioned address in 
property bearing no. ________ Uttam Nagar, New Delhi for the last many year and i s living 
with wife and minor children, as a tenant. 
2. That the plaintiff is a tenant in respect of the above said property bearing  
no_____________Uttam Nagar, New Delhi consisting two rooms, latrine and kitchen in the 
above said premises of  Rent Rs. …….per month  excluding electricity and water charges 
under the tenancy of late Sh_________ who died on ……..(date)  and late Sh. _____ used to 
collect the rent from the plaintiff but late Sh. _____did not issued any rent receip t to the 
plaintiff even after several demands made by the plaintiff but he always used to p ostpone the 
issue of rent receipt. 
3. That the plaintiff spent a huge amount on the construction of these two room s in the 
above said premises at the request of Late Sh. _____and Sh. _____assured the plaintiff to 
adjust the said rent (the plaintiff is having the necessary documents/proofs of  material for 
construction of rooms in the above said property). It is also pertinent to ment ion here that the 
plaintiff looked after late Sh. ______ many a times, whenever he fell ill. 
4. That at present the plaintiff is having the peaceful possassion of premi ses no. 
____________Uttam Nagar, New Delhi and is having the whole necessary documents/record 
regarding possession (photocopy of Ration Card, School Card is enclosed herewith) but the  
above said defendants are internded to disturbe the peaceful physical possession of  the 
plaintiff of the above said premises. 
5. That the plaintiff is having the whole necessary household goods which are 
lying/kept in the above said premises and is living peacefully. 
 15    
6. That the plaintiff has paid the agreed rent @ Rs. …… per month  to late Sh. 
______upto ….. . It is also pertinent to mention hare that the legal heirs of late Sh. ______are  
not in the knowledge of the plaintiff and at present also the plaintiff is ready  to tender the rent 
before the legal heirs of late Sh. _________. 
7. That on ……..(date)  the above said defendant came to the above said premises of the 
plaintiff and threatened the plaintiff to vacate the tenanted premises immediate ly otherwise 
the plaintiff would have to face dire consequences, when the plaintiff asked about thei r 
identity then they did not disclose the same, instead started throwing household goods 
forcibly and illegally and started to quarrel with the plaintiff when the l ocal 
residents/neighbourers intervened in the matter then the defendants left the spot after 
threatening for dire consequences and to dispossess the plaintiff forcibly and ill egally in the 
near future with the help of local goondas. The defendants openly stated that the staf f of 
police post ……… dances at their tune and it is very easy job for them to dispossess any 
person or to grab the property of any one with the help of the police staff. 
8. That immediately on the same date the plaintiff r ushed to the police post ……. to 
lodge his report against the defendants regarding such incident but duty officer did not lodge 
the report of the plaintiff. The plaintiff was surprised to see that both the defendants were 
already pr esent at the Police Post …… . 
9. That on ………(date) , the plaintiff sent a notice to the defendant no. 1 and copy to 
Chowki Incharge Police Post …….  by Regd. A.D. (copy of the same is enclosed herewith) 
but Police Post ……… staff has not taken any action against the defendants for reasons best 
known to them. 
10. That on …….. (date) , the defendants along with two unknown persons/ whom the 
plaintiff can recognise by face, came to the above said premises bearing no. _______ Ut tam 
Nagar, and knocked at the door at odd hours and threatened the plaintiff to come out of th e 
room. The plaintiff saw their faces from gaps of the door and the plainti ff got nervous, and 
therefore did not come out of two-room apartment. The said persons threatened the plaint iff 
to vacate the premises immediately. However, then the neighbourers gathered there and th ey 
restrained the defendants from dispossessing the plaintiff from the above sa id premises 
forcibly and illegally. When the neighbourers threatened them, they left the spot w ith a threat 
to come after one or two days with heavy force to dispossess the plaintiff  from the above said 
premises forcibly and illegally. 
11.  That o n ……(date) ,  the plaintiff again went to the police post …….  to lodge the report 
against the defenda nts but no Police Officer of police post …….  is ready to listen against the 
defendants and they advised the plaintiff to approach to the competent court of law to seek  
his remedy and to get injunction order against the defendants and the police post ……. . 
12. That the plaintiff  has no other efficatious remedy except to approach to this Hon'ble court 
for seeking relief of injunction  against the defendants from interfering in the peaceful 
possession of the premises no. __________Uttam Nagar, New Delhi. 
13. That the cause of action arose on different date when the defendants threaten ed the 
plaintiff to vacate the premises no. __________Uttam Nagar, New Delhi and threatened the 
plaintiff of dire consequences and further to dispossess him from the above premi ses bearing 
no.__________Uttam Nagar, New Delhi forcibly and illegally. The cause of action lastly  
arose on …….  when the defendants again threatened and tried to dispossess the plaintiff from 
 16    
the premises  no. ______ Uttam Nagar, New Delhi forcibly and illegally with the connivanc e 
of the Local Police. The cause of action still subsists as the threat of the defenda nts to 
dispossess the plaintiff and to create disturbance in the peaceful possession of the premises 
no._______ Uttam Nagar, New Delhi continues. 
14. The value of this suit for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction is Rs. --------- on 
which court fee of Rs. ___________is paid.  
15. This Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to entertain this suit because the part of the ca use of 
action arose at Delhi and the suit property is situated within the territo rial jurisdiction of this 
Hon’ble Court. 
 
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to: 
(a) pass the decree for Permanent Injunction in favour of the plaintiff and against  the 
defendants thereby restraining the defendants, their representatives, employees, agents etc. 
from dispossessing the plaintiff forcibly and illegally from the tenanted premi ses bearing no. 
_______ Uttam Nagar, New Delhi and also from interfering in the peaceful possession of  the 
above said premises. 
 (b) award cost of the suit in favour of the Plaintiff and against the Defendants;  
 (c) pass such other and further order(s) as may be deemed fit and proper on the  
  facts and in the circumstances of this case. 
 
Plaintiff  
Place:          Through              
Date:              Advocate 
 
VERIFICATION: 
Verified at Delhi on this …..of  January 20… that the contents of paras 1 to .. of the plaint are 
true to my knowledge derived from the records of the Plaintiff maintained in the ordinary 
course of its business, those of paras .. to … are true on information received and believed to 
be true and last para is the humble prayer to this Hon ’ble Court.  
         
 Plaintiff  
 
 
 
[NOTE :  This plaint has to be supported by an affidavit] 
* * * * * 
 17    
APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY INJUNCTION 
IN THE COURT OF SENIOR CIVIL JUDGE (DISTRICT ________), DELHI 
 
IA  NO. ___________OF 20…    
 IN  
SUIT NO. ___________OF 20... 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
Sh. Om Veer Singh,  
S/o ____________ 
R/o ……                                 PLAINTIFF/APPLICANT  
VERSUS 
1. Dr. U. Basu, 
      S/o ___________ 
      R/o …..  
2.   Sh. Tapan Kumar, 
      S/o ___________ 
      R/O….                               DEFENDANTS/RESPONDENTS 
APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY INJUNCTION UNDER ORDER XXXIX, RULE 
1 & 2 READ WITH SECTION 151 OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 
 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the plaintiff has filed a suit for permanent injunction which is pend ing for 
disposal before this Hon ’ble Court. 
2. That the contents of the accompanying suit for permanent injunction may kindly be 
read as a part and parcel of this application which are not repeated here for t he sake of 
brevity. 
3. That the plaintiff/applicant has got a prima-facie case in his favour and t here is 
likelihood of success in the present case. 
4. That in case the defendants are not restrained by means of ad-interim injunct ion for 
dispossessing the plaintiff from the above said premises no. _________ Uttam Nagar, New 
Delhi and from interfering in physical peaceful possession of the above said premise s, the 
plaintiff shall suffer irrepairable loss and injury and the suit shall bec ome anfractuous and 
would lead to multiplicity of the cases. 
5. That the balance of convenience lies in favour of the plaintiff and against the 
defendants. 
 
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to :- 
 
 18    
a) Pass ex-parte ad interim injunction restraining the defendants, their associates , servants, 
agents and their representatives from interfering into the peaceful physical po ssession of the 
plaintiff in the above said premises and from dispossessing the applicant/plaintiff from the 
same. 
b) pass such other and further order(s) as may be deemed fit and proper on the facts and in the 
circumstances of this case. 
 
Plaintiff /Applicant 
Place:         Through              
Date:              Advocate 
 
 
[NOTE :  This Application has to be supported by an affidavit]. 
* * * * * 
  
 19    
 
APPLICATION UNDER ORDER XXXIX RULE 2-A 
 IN THE  COURT OF SH.______SENIOR CIVIL JUDGE (DISTRICT ___________), 
DELHI 
IA NO.____________OF 20.. 
IN 
SUIT NO.___________OF   20.. 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
 
ABC            ...PLAINTIFF/APPLICANT 
Versus 
XYZ           …DEFENDANT/RESPONDENT  
 
APPLICATION UNDER ORDER XXXIX R ULE  2-A READ WITH SECTION 151 OF 
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFF 
 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the above noted suit for injunction is pending before this Hon ’ble Court and the 
contents of the plaint be read as part of this application. The plaintiff/applicant is t enant in suit 
premises bearing House No………………, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi and the defendant is 
landlord of the same.  
2. That on an application U/O 39, R 1 & 2 for interim stay against interfe rence in 
peaceful possession of the plaintiff/applicant as well as dispossession from the said premises, 
without due process of law was filed by the plaintiff/applicant against the 
defendant/respondent alongwith the plaint.  
3. That on …….. (date) this Hon ’ble Court was pleased to grant interim injunction in 
favour of the plaintiff/applicant and against the defendant/respondent for not to interfere in 
the peaceful possession of the plaintiff/applicant and not to dispossess him without  due 
process of law from the suit property. 
4. That on dt. …………..the defendant/respondent inspite of the service and knowledge 
of the above interim injunction orders dt …………., took forcible possession of the su it 
premises with the help of anti social elements in utter disregard of the ord ers of this Hon ’ble 
Court and the applicant/plaintiff ’s household goods were thrown on the roadside. 
5. That the defendant/respondent has thus knowingly and willfully disobeyed and 
violated the injunction orders issued by this Hon ’ble Court on ………… (date) and he is as 
such guilty of disobedience of the orders of this Hon ’ble Court and has rendered himself 
 20    
liable to be detained in civil imprisonment and attachment of his property. List of properties is 
attached. 
 
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to: 
a) take appropriate action U/O 39 R 2-A of the Code of Civil Procedure and other provisions 
of law may be taken against the defendant/respondent and his property may be directed to be 
attached and he may be directed to be kept in civil imprisonment for the maximum term.  
b) direct restoration of the possession of the suit property to the plaintiff/applic ant. 
c) any other appropriate orders/directions may also be passed as may be deemed fit  in the 
facts and circumstances of the case in favour of plaintiff/applicant. 
  
Delhi.         Plaintiff/Applicant 
Dated:       Through 
         Advocate 
 
(Note: An affidavit, duly attested by oath commissioner, in support of this applica tion is to be 
attached with to this application)                  
 
* * * * * 
  
 21    
APPLICATION TO SUE AS AN INDIGENT PERSON 
IN THE COURT OF……….., ROHINI COURT (DIST…..), DELHI  
SUIT NO…….OF…….  
IN THE MATTER OF : 
X ___________  
S/o _________________  
R/o _________, New Delhi               …APPLICANT/PLAINTIFF 
Versus 
Y ___________  
S/o _________________  
R/o _________, New Delhi       …RESPONDENT/DEFENDANT 
 
APPLICATION UNDER ORDER XXXIII READ WITH SECTION 151 OF THE 
CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the applicant has filed the above titled suit which is pending disposal before this 
Hon’ble Court.  
2. That the contents of the accompanying suit may kindly be read as a part and parcel of  
this application which are not repeated here for the sake of brevity. 
3. That the applicant is an indigent person and has no movable or immovable property 
and has no source of income. Therefore is unable to pay the requisite amount of court fee 
stamp as required by law.  
4. That the applicant undertakes to pay the entire court fee if the case is decreed in his 
favour. 
5. That there are sufficient reasons for the acceptance of the present application and for 
granting permission to the applicant to institute the present suit as an indigent per son. 
 
PRAYER: 
It is therefore most respectfully prayed that the Hon ’ble Court may:  
a. allowed to sue as an indigent person in the interest of justice. 
b. to pass such further orders/directions as it may deem fit and proper. 
 
 Applicant 
Date:         Through  
Place:          Advocate 
[Note:  The petition must be supported by an affidavit]. 
* * * * * 
  
 22    
SUIT FOR EJECTMENT AND DAMAGES  
BEFORE THE SENIOR CIVIL JUDGE (DISTRICT ___________), DELHI  
SUIT NO.________________OF 20.. 
 
IN THE MATTER OF, 
Mrs. Surjit Kaur Sahi W/O 
Mr. Avinder Singh Sahi S/O  
Both R/o   ___________,Chandigarh     ….PLAINTIFFS 
VERSUS 
Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. 
Hemkunt Chamber, Nehru Place, New Delhi-110029 
Through its Chairman/Managing Director                …DEFENDANT  
 
SUIT FOR EJECTMENT AND DAMAGES FOR WRONGFUL USE AND 
OCCUPATION 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. The plaintiff being the owners of flat no. _____Nehru Place, New Delhi let out the 
said flat to M/s. National Power Transmission Corporation Limited (a Government  of India 
undertaking) now called as Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, having their reg istered 
office at  Hemkunt Chamber, Nehru Place, New Delhi-110 019 for a period of thr ee years 
with effect from ……(date)  vide unregistered Lease deed (copy annexed as Annexure ‘ A’). 
The delivery of the possesson of the said premises was simultaneous on the said date. 
2. That the period of three years referr ed above starting from ……..  expi red on …… . 
That after the expiry of the said Lease the defendant became a month to month tenant  of the 
plaintiffs. 
3. That the plaintiffs being in need of the premises in question approached the defendant 
for vacation of the same on various dates ( give dates ). However, the defendant who were 
approached through their officers did not agree to the plaintiff ’s demand. The plaintiffs 
thereafter served a legal notice through their Counsel, Shri _______(copy annexed as 
Annexure ‘B’ ) under section 106 of Transfer of Property Act terminating the said tenancy on 
mid-night of…….(date)  
4. That the defendant received the plaintiff ’s legal notice U/s. 106 of the Transfer of 
property Act on …..(date) i.e. clear 15 days before the last day of ……(date) and  thus i s a 
valid notice under the Transfer of Property Act (proof of the service of l egal notice is 
annexed to same as Annexure ‘B’) 
5. That however, the defendant even after receiving the said legal notice have neither 
vacated the premises nor shown their intention to vacate. Thus the defendant from ……(dat e) 
are in wrongful use and occupation @ Rs. 1,000/- per day as the rate of rent in the area are for 
such premises prevailing and the plaintiffs have rightly assessed the rate of Rs. 1,000/- per 
day. The same rate was demanded in the legal notice dated…... That since the premises wer e 
 23    
needed by the plaintiffs for their own purposes they will have to take o n rent the premises of 
same size in the same area where the flat is situated and the plaintiffs have done a market  
survey during the search for the flat and found that the rate of rent in the ar ea is Rs. 100/- to 
Rs. 150/- per sq. feet.   The plaintiffs own flat which is 370 sq. ft. super area will be availab le 
in the market for Rs. 37000/- to 55,500/- per month. The plaintiffs does not have mea ns to 
take on rent a flat for own purposes at such high rates and thus needed the flat and f or this 
reason asked the defendant to vacate the premises.  
6. The defendant is presently paying a monthly rent of Rs. 6808/- per month (Rupees 
six thousand eight hundred eight) for the plaintiffs flat measuring 370 sq. ft . super area. The 
plaintiffs premises are not governed by the Delhi Rent Control Act a s the rate of rent is more 
than Rs. 3,500/- and thus the Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to try the matter. 
7. The cause of action in the present case arose on ___________when the plaintiffs 
approached the defendant for the vacation of the said flat. The cause of action f urther arose 
on___________ when the plaintiffs again approached the officers of the defendant for the 
vacation of the flat who however did not oblige. The cause of action further ar ose when the 
plaintiffs se rved a legal notice dated ……  through their advocate Shri Ajit Panday asking the 
defenda nt to vacate the same by …… . The said not ice was duly received on ……  However, 
the defendant did not vacate the flat in question. The cause of action in the pr esent case is a 
continuing one. 
8. That since the property whose possession is sought is situated in Delhi. The Lease for 
the premises was executed in Delhi and delivery of possession made in Delhi.  And since the 
premises are not covered by Delhi Rent Control Act. The Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to 
try the matter. 
9. That the court fee payable has been calculated advalorem as per the chart/section 7 of 
the Court Fee Act on the annual rent received by the plaintiffs. The annual rent is R s. 
………….. arrived at by multiplying monthly rent of Rs ………….  by 12. On this a court fee 
of Rs. …….  is paid. The plaintiffs undertake to pay any additional court fee that may be 
found due by the Hon ’ble court. 
 
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to: 
(i) pass a decree for ejectment against the defendant and in favour of plaintiffs ; 
(ii) pass a decree for payment of damages @ Rs. 1,000/- per day for wrongful use and  
             occupation of the flat by the defendant ; 
(iii) Any other relief deemed fit and proper may also be given.  
(iv) Costs of the case may also be given. 
PLAINTIFFS 
Delhi        THROUGH  
Dated                            ADVOCATE 
 24    
VERIFICATION :  
Verified at Delhi on … day….. of , 20… that the contents of paras 1 to …. are true t o our 
personal knowledge and those of paras … to …. are true &  correct on the basis of legal 
advice received and belived to be true. Last para is prayer to the Hon ’ble Court. 
 
PLAINTIFFS 
[NOTE  : This plaint has to be supported by an affidavit] 
 
* * * * *  
  
 25    
SUIT FOR SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACT 
IN THE COURT OF…………….., ROHINI COURT (DIST…….), DELHI  
SUIT NO. ………OF………  
IN THE MATTER OF : 
X ___________  
S/o _________________  
R/o _________, New Delhi                 …PLAINTIFF  
Versus 
Y ___________  
S/o _________________  
R/o _________, New Delhi         …DEFENDANT 
 
SUIT FOR SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACT 
 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the plaintiff is a resident of………  
2. That the defendant is the absolute owner of the property bearing 
no…….admeasuring (give details of the property) (hereinafter refered to as the su it 
property). 
3. That the plaintiff was in need of the property for residential purpose and came to k now that 
the Defendant is interested in selling the suit property. 
4. That the plaintiff approached the defendant for purchasing the suit property on…..(d ate) 
and the plaintiff and the defendant discussed the terms and conditions. 
5. That on… .(date), the plaintiff and the defendant entered into an agreement in writing 
whereby the defendant agreed to sell his property to the plaintiff for Rs……….. T he copy of 
the agreement is annexed as Annexure A. 
6. That the plaintiff paid Rs………to the defendant as earnest money and it was deci ded that 
the balance of Rs……..will be paid on….... and the sale deed will be executed on the 
possession of the suit property will be handed over to the plaintiff on the pa yment of the 
balance amount. 
7. That on……(date), the plaintiff approached the defendant and requested him to execute the 
sale deed along with handing over of the possession of the suit property to the plaintiff. 
However, the defendant refused to execute the sale deed. 
8. That the plaintiff approached the defendant for execution of the sale deed on variou s 
occasions (mention the dates), however, the defendant refused to execute the sale deed on one 
pretext or the other.  
9. That the plaintiff finally issued a legal notice dated…..(date) to the defendant calling upon 
the defendant to perform his part of the agreement by executing the sale deed and handi ng 
 26    
over the possession of the suit property to the plaintiff. However, the defendant  failed to 
comply with his part of the agreement and did not reply to the legal notice. 
10. That the plaintiff is ready and willing to perform his part of agree ment by paying the 
balance amount. 
11. That the cause of action arose on…..(date) whe n the defendant agreed to sell the suit 
property to the plaintiff . The cause of action further arose on………….. It further 
arose……That the cause of action is still subsisting as the defendant has refused  to perform 
his part of the agreement. 
12. That the suit is within the period of limitation. 
13. That this Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to entertain this suit because the cause of action 
arose within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. 
14. That the requisite court fees have been paid. 
 
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to: 
a. pass a decree of specific performance of the agreement in favour of the plainti ff and 
against the defendant directing the defendant to execute the sale deed and hand over the 
possession of the suit property to the plaintiff, 
b. award cost of the suit in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant; and  
c. pass such other and further order(s) as may be deemed fit and proper on the  facts and 
in the circumstances of this case. 
 
                                                                                                        Plaintiff  
Place:                              Through              
Date:                                                   Advocate 
 
VERIFICATION: 
Verified at Delhi on this 1st day of  January 20… that the contents of paras 1 to … of the 
plaint are true to my knowledge derived from the records of the Plaintiff maint ained in the 
ordinary course of its b usiness, those of paras …. to 14  are true on information received and 
believed to be true and last para is the humble prayer to this Hon ’ble Court. 
         
 Plaintiff  
[NOTE : The above plaint  must be supported by an Affidavit] 
* * * * * 
  
 27    
MODEL DRAFT FOR WRITTEN STATEMENT  
IN THE COURT OF SHRI ……………… CIVIL JUDGE  
(DISTRICT __________), DELHI 
SUIT NO. ……………………OF    2017 
 
X_______________                                            … PLAINTIFF  
VERSUS  
Y_________________                         …..DEFENDANT 
WRITTEN STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANT  
 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
 
PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS : 
 1. That the suit is barred by limitation under Article .......... of the Limitat ion Act and 
is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. 
 2. That this Hon ’ble Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and try this suit 
because..................... 
 3. That the suit has not been properly valued for the purpose of court fees and jur isdiction 
and is therefore liable to rejected outrightly. 
 4. That there is absolutely no cause of action in favour of the Plaintiff and ag ianst the 
Defendant. The suit is therefore liable to be rejected on this ground also.  
 5. That the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties, namely .......................... 
 6. That the suit is bad for mis-joinder of Z. 
 7. That the suit is barred by the decree dated ................... passed in suit No....................... 
titled Y Versus X by Sh. ..........................., Sub-Judge, Delhi, The present suit is therefore   
barred by the principle of res-judicata and therefore liable to be dismissed on thi s short 
ground alone.  
 8. That the suit is liable to be stayed as a previously instituted suit betw een the parties 
bearing No.................. is pending in the Court of Sh. ......................., Sub-Judge, Delhi 
 9. That the suit has not been properly verified in accordance with law.  
 10. That the Plaintiff ’s suit for permanent injunction is barred by Section 41 (h) of the 
Specific Relief Act since a more efficacious remedy is available to the Plaint iff. The Plaintiff 
has alleged breach of contract by the Defendant. Assuming, though not admitting, that the 
Defendant has committed any alleged breach, the remedy available to the Plaintiff i s by way 
of the suit for specific performance. 
 11. That the Plaintiff ’s suit for permanent injunction is also barred by Section 41 (i) of the 
Specific Relief Act because he has not approached this Hon ’ble Court with clean hands and 
his conduct has been most unfair, dishonest and tainted with illegalit y. 
 28    
 12. That the Plaintiff ’s suit for declaration is barred by Section 34 of the Special Relief 
Act as the plaintiff has omitted to claim further consequential relief available t o him.  
 13. That the suit is barred by Section 14 of the Specific Relief Act as the contract  of 
personal service cannot be enforced. 
 14. That the suit is liable to be dismissed outrightly as the Plaintiff has not given the 
mandatory notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure/Section 14 (1) (a)  Rent 
Control Act/Section 478 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act. 
 15. That the suit is liable to be dismissed as the Plaintiff firm is not regi stered under 
Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act and as such is not competent to institute this suit.  
 16. That the present suit is barred by Section 4 of the Benami Transaction  (Prohibition) 
Act, 1988, and is therefore liable to be dismissed outrightly. 
ON MERITS  :  
Without prejudice to the preliminary objections stated above, the reply on merits, w hich is 
without prejudice to one another, is as under:- 
 1. That the contents of para 1 of the plaint is correct and is admitted. 
2. That the contents of para 2 of the plaint are denied for want of knowledge. T he Plaintiff be 
put to the strict proof of each and every allegation made in the para under reply.  
3. That the contents of para 3 of the plaint are absolutely incorrect and are denie d. It is 
specifically denied that the Plaintiff is the owner of the suit property. A s a matter of fact, Mr. 
N is the owner of the suit propert y. 
4. That with respect to para 4 of the plaint, it is correct that the Defendant i s in possession of 
the suit property. However, the remaining contents of para under reply are absolutel y 
incorrect and are denied. It is specifically denied that...................... 
5-10. (Each and every allegation must be replied specifically depending upon the facts of 
each case. The above reply on merits is therefore only illustrative in nature.)  
11. That para 11 of the plaint is incorrect and is denied. There is no cause of action in favour 
of the Plaintiff and against the Defendant because....................... The plaintiff is ther efore 
liable to be rejected outrightly.  
12. That the contents of para 21 is not admitted. This Hon ’ble Court has no jurisdiction to 
entertain this suit because the subject matter of this suit exceeds the pec uniary jurisdiction of 
this Hon ’ble Court. 
13. The the contents of para 13 is not admitted. The suit has not been properly valued for t he 
purpose of court fee and jurisdiction. According to the Defendant the correct v aluation of the 
suit is Rs...................  
 
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to: 
a) Dismiss the suit of the plaintiff. 
b) Award costs to the defendant. 
 29    
c) Pass any other just and equitable order as deemed fit in the interest of justice. 
DEFENDANT 
Delhi        THROUGH  
Dated                               ADVOCATE 
VERIFICATION :  
Verified at Delhi on … day….. of , 20… that the contents of paras  1 to …. Of the preliminary 
objection and para…to… of reply on merits are true to my personal knowledge and those of 
paras … to ….of preliminary objection and para…to… of reply on merits are true & corr ect 
on the basis of legal advice received and belived to be true. Last para is prayer to the Hon ’ble 
Court. 
 
 
DEFENDANT 
 
 
[NOTE :  Counter Claim, Set off can be joined in the Written Statement and the same may be 
verified and supported by affidavit] 
  
* * * * * 
  
 30    
CAVEAT UNDER SECTION 148-A OF CPC 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI 
CAVEAT NO.         /2017 
(ARISING OUT OF THE JUDGMENT AND ORDER DATED ……… IN  SUIT NO. 
……… TITLED AS ABC  v.  XYZ PASSED BY SH. ___________, CIVIL JUDGE, 
_______________ DISTRICT, DELHI) 
In the matter of: 
XYZ 
S/o 
R/o         …Petitioner 
 
Versus 
ABC  
S/o 
R/o              …Respondent/Caveator 
CAVE AT UNDER SECTION 148-A OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 
BY RESPONDENT/CAVEATOR. 
Most Respectfully Showeth: 
1. That Sh. ___________________, Civil Judge, ______________ District, Delhi ha s 
passed order against appellants in Civil Suit No. …………….. titled as ABC v. XYZ on 
……………, whereby application for amendment U/O VI Rule 17 CPC filed by 
plaintiff/would be petitioner, was dismissed. 
2. That the caveator is expecting that the plaintiff/would-be petitioner may file a Civi l 
Misc. (Main) Petition under Article 227 of Constitution of India against said order in thi s 
Hon’ble Court as such this caveat is being filed. 
3. That the caveator has a right to appear and contest the Civil Misc. (Main) Petition if 
preferred by the plaintiff/would-be petitioner. 
4. That the caveator desires that he may be given the notice of the filing of the Civil 
Misc. (Main) Petition as and when the same is filed by the plaintiff/would-be petitioner, to 
enable caveator to appear at the time of hearing for admission and no stay may be granted 
without hearing the caveator/respondent. 
5. That a copy of this caveat has been sent by Regd. A/D post to the plaintiff/would be 
Petitioner. 
PRAYER: 
It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that nothing may be done in Civi l Misc. that may be 
filed by the petitioner without notice to the caveator or his counsel. 
         Caveator 
Delhi       Through 
Dated:         Advocate 
(Note: An affidavit of the caveator, duly attested by oath commissioner , in support of this 
application is to be attached with to this application.)  
* * * * * 
 31    
TRANSFER PETITION UNDER SECTION 25 OF CPC 
Sec 25 of CPC 1908 states that on an application made by a party and after notice to the 
parties and after hearing them the Supreme Court may at any stage if satsfied that such 
a order is needed in the interest of justice may under this section order that any sui t, 
appeal or any other proceeding be transferred from a High Court or other civil court in 
one state to High Court or other civil court in another state. 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION 
TRANSFER PETITION (CIVIL) NO. _____  OF  2017 
(UNDER SECTION 25 OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, READ WITH  
ORDER XLI, SUPREME COURT RULES, 2013.) 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
J ___________ S/o __________ R/O ________       …PETITIONER 
    VERSUS 
1. Union of India, 
 Through its Secretary, 
 Ministry of Defence, 
 South Block,New Delhi-110001 
2. Chief of Air Staff, 
 Vayu Bhawan, 
 New Delhi-110001. 
3. Air Officer Commanding –in-Chief 
 Western Air Command, 
 Subrato Park,  New Delhi-110010 
4. Group Captan A ______ 
 Station Commander, Air Force 
 Station Suratgarh.  
5. Presiding Officer 
 Court Martial, Subrato Park,New Delhi.    …RESPONDENTS 
 
AND IN THE MATTER OF:  
 TRANSFER OF CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO.727/2015 FILED BY THE 
PETITIONER AGAINST THE RESPONDENTS PENDING IN  THE HIGH COUR T OF 
DELHI AT NEW DELHI, TO THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD.  
To 
The Hon ’ble Chief Justice of India,  
And his Companion Justices of the Hon ’ble Supreme Court of India at New Delhi 
 32    
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the petitioner is seeking Transfer of Civil Writ Petition No.727/201 5 filed by the 
Petitioner against the respondents pending in the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi , to the 
High Court of Judicature of Allahabad, titled “JWO BP Misra Versus Union of India & Ors. ” 
2. BRIEF FACTS: 
i. The Petitioner joined as Airmen in the Trade Flight Mechanic Air Frame and later 
after conversion course became Air Frame Fitter after passing the necessary examinati on and 
training. During the period petitioner also gained a promotion to the rank of Corporal, 
Sergeant and later Junior Warrant Officer – Class-II, a Gazetted post. The Petitioner was also 
awarded three good conduct badge Pay each after 4 year of Services for very good character 
and good proficiency in his trade. There was no whisper of any kind of misconduct whil e 
working at various places during 22 year of service as per the directions of t he Respondents. 
The same is a matter of record and speaks in volumes about the Character and Trade 
proficiency of the petitioner.  
ii. The Petitioner got his last rank after passing due examination and consideration of 
last Annual Confidential Report (ACRS) Significantly in the year 1998 the Peti tioner was 
awarded in assessment 94 / 100 as exceptional which speaks about the high caliber of the 
Petitioner in his trade.  
iii. The Petitioner was compelled to file a Redress of Grievances ROG agains t 
Respondent No.6 for non grant of leave and unwanted harassment in many ways i.e. sending 
on temporary duty assigning Secondary Duties, not granting of leave and denial of even 
monthly salary for four months which is a matter of record. The Petitioner has one son 
suffering with asthmatic problem and came on posting to present place as per the Medica l 
advice of the authorities. 
iv. The Petitioner was charge sheeted and later the same was dropped as he has 
complained about the grievances against his Squadron Technical Officer (STO) for  illegal 
harassment. 
v. The petitioner has all the apprehensions of his life as such filed a FIR at the P olice 
Station for seeking protection from the officials of the Respondents. The Secur ity Officer of 
the Respondents gave undertaking before the Police on behalf of Respondents that no harm 
will be done to the Petitioner. After withdrawing the Complaint by the Petitioner , the 
Petitioner was immediately sent on temporary duty to Nalia in Gujarat due to irritation of 
complaint. The Petitioner had no alternative but to proceed as directed without bei ng his turn. 
The harassment of the Petitioner continued at the behest of the Respondent No.6 
Commanding Officer C.O. and his Subordinates. After strong and heavy earth quake in whol e 
of the Gujarat in the morning the Petitioner was directed to go back to his Uni t knowing fully 
well of non-availability of transport which was totally abandoned due to the ear th quake, the 
same is matter of record. However the Petitioner has to beg for his food and som ehow 
reached his unit to avoid wrath of the Respondents by way of disciplinary action f or mis-
conduct of not disobedience. 
 33    
vi. The Petitioner aggrieved by such highhandedness of the Respondents filed an Appea l 
under 26 of Air Force Act for redressal of his grievances. The Petitioner gav e a reminder for 
disposal of his appeal under Section 26 of the Air Force Act. The Appeal was rejected without 
speaking order with stereo type of order devoid of merits. The Petitioner fi led application for 
permission to file Civil Case and for grant of leave. The same was not granted by the 
Respondents and even denied the acknowledgment of the receipt. Application for extension of 
service was rejected and ordered to be discharged. The Petitioner was orally threatene d to 
abstain from raising such applications.  
vii. The Petitioner was put under Close arrest without informing his family as even 
directed by the Hon ’ble Supreme Court in D.K. Basu ’s case, which curtails the liberty of the 
Petitioner in a illegal manner. The reasons are yet to be known. The Petitioner  sought 
interview with the Station Commander which was granted later on 9.10.2001. The Station 
Commander instead of redressing of the grievance and consoling the Petitioner fo r his illegal 
close arrest, further threatened the Petitioner with a dire consequence and of fu rther putting 
him under close arrest and threatened for Court Martial. 
viii. The Petitioners Summary of Evidence 2nd is completed in an illegal manner 
without providing him a copy of the previous Summary of Evidence which is mandatory to 
meet the requirements of principles of Natural Justice. The petitioner i s now informed that he 
is likely to Court martialled by way of GCM. and  since last 4 months the Peti tioner is under 
constant threat of disciplinary action at the hands of the Respondents for no f ault of his where 
as all officials under the Respondents have joined hands together to harass the Pet itioner by 
all means and make example case for others. The Petitioners extension application is also 
rejected as the last Respondent has spoiled his ACR for the year 2003 and 2005 without any 
communication to the Petitioner or in a Counseling to the Petitioner as prov ided under the 
provisions of the Air Force Act. Hence Writ Petition No.727 of 2015 filed for  ini tiation of 
appropriate enquiry and disciplinary action against the officials for illegal ha rassment of the 
Petitioner and for quashing of the ACRs 2003 & 2005 and subsequent order of discharge. 
ix. Respondents decided to conduct General Court Martial in retaliation to  certain 
observations and queries by this Hon ’ble Court to explain the reason of close arrest in 
September, 2014. That no legal aid or defence Advocate was provided. All members were 
ignorant about law and worked at the tune of the Judge Advocate and all pleas of pet itioner 
were disallowed in arbitrary manner. Preliminary objections were not taken by General Court 
Martial on record. The Petitioner approached Hon ’ble High Court of Delhi by way of Civil 
Misc. Application in which notice was issued. General Court Martial without  adhering to law 
and provisions and principles of natural justice passed the order, “to be reduced to the rank of 
Cpl. From JWO (JCO) subject to confirmation. ” The copy of the order was not given to the 
Petitioner to deprive him to approach this Hon ’ble Court. The Petitioner was released form 
open arrest which speaks in volumes about the high-handedness of the Respondents to 
deprive him of any legal aid or counseling by any one.  Proceeding copy of General Court  
Martial were denied to the Petitioner by which denied the statutory right of Appeal u/s 161 (1) 
of Air Force Act. Even affidavit of defence witness was not taken on record.  
x. The Petitioner was discharged. Pension stopped. Regular threat to life is given as 
numerous incidents of elimination of Airmen who raise voice against commissioned officers. 
 34    
The Petitioner is in bad financial state and has no money to meet his day to day expenses. The 
petitioner has no means to incur heavy expenditure in travelling to Delhi fo r conduct of his 
case. The petitioner also feels that his life will be put to an end by  the respondents. Fearing 
safety of his life the petitioner has moved his family bag and baggage to Distri ct Pratap Garh 
(U.P.). That the High Court of judicature at Allahabad are near to the place of residence  of the 
petitioner and the petitioner feels that the writ Petition No. 727 of 2015 ti tled B.P. Mishra V/s 
U.O.I. be transferred to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad as the peti tioner has no 
trust and faith in the respondent and they can stoop to any level and the petitioner fears for his 
life. Hence the petitioner is seeking transfer of his  case to the High Court at Allahabad. 
3. This Transfer Petition is being filed by the Petitioner for transferri ng the Civil Writ 
Petition No.727/2015 filed by the Petitioner at the High Court of Delhi at N ew Delhi on 
amongst others the following grounds. 
GROUNDS 
I. Because the Petitioners have no trust and faith in the respondents as they are 
prejudiced and using influence and every other illegal method to defeat the  petitioner. Thus 
the petitioner is seeking the transfer of the case from the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi to 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. 
II. Because the petitioner have no trust and faith in Opposite party as they had in past 
acted with malice and making life threatening attempts and petitioner fears for  his and of his 
family’s life. 
III. Because the petitioner is discharged from service and is not getting Pensi on and dues 
and petitioner is reduced in state of penury and is not in a position to conduct case in Delhi. 
IV. Because on 31.5.2015 the Petitioner was discharged. His pension stopped and he 
received regular threat to life is given as numerous incidents of elimination of Airmen who 
raise voice against commissioned officers.  
V. Because the Petitioner is in bad financial state and has no money to meet his day t o 
day expenses. The petitioner has no means to incur heavy expenditure in travelling to Delhi 
for conduct of his case. The petitioner also feels that his life will be put to an end by the 
respondents. Fearing safety of his life the petitioner has moved his family bag  and baggage to 
District Pratapgarh (U.P.). That the High Court of judicature at Allahabad a re near to the 
place of residence of the petitioner and the petitioner feels that the wri t Petition No. 727 of 
2015 titled B.P. Mishra V/s U.O.I. be transferred to the High Court of Judicature a t Allahabad 
as the petitioner has no trust and faith in the respondent and they can stoop to any lev el and 
the petitioner fears for his life.  
VI. Because in the facts and circumstances stated above, it would be in the i nterest of 
justice that the said Civil Writ Petition No. 727/2015 filed by the petiti oner against the 
respondents pending in the High court of Delhi at New Delhi be transferred to  High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad (U.P.). Even otherwise there is no likelihood of disposal of writ 
petition No. 727/2015 due to heavy back log of cases. The copy of the civil writ peti tion 
No.727 / 2015 is Annexure P-1. 
4. That the petitioner has not filed any other similar transfer petition  before this Hon ’ble 
Court so far in respect of this matter.  
 35    
PRAYER: 
In view of the above facts and circumstances, it is respectfully submitted that this Hon’ble 
Court may be pleased:  
a) To pass order for transfer of the Civil Writ Petition No. 727/2015 filed by the 
Petitioner against the respondent titled “JWO BP Mishra Vs. Union of India ” from High 
Court Delhi at New Delhi to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. 
b) Any other and further order as may be deemed fit and proper may also be passed. 
 
         FILED BY: 
 
DATE OF DRAWN _______________  
DATE OF FILING             ADVOCATE FOR THE PETITIONER 
NEW DELHI 
 
[NOTE : To be supported by an affidavit] 
* * * * * 
 
  
 36    
EXECUTION APPLICATION  
IN THE COURT OF ____________________________ 
EXECUTION  PETITION NO. _____ OF 2017  
IN 
CIVIL SUIT NO. ________ OF 2015 
 
A                                                                                          … DECREE HOLDER  
Versus 
B                                                                                           …JUDGMENT DEBTOR  
 
THE DECREE HOLDER PRAYS FOR EXECUTION OF THE DECREE/ORDE R 
DATED DD/MM/YYYY, THE PARTICULARS WHEREOF ARE STATED IN THE  
COLUMNS HEREUNDER:- 
                                                                                                Police Station:- 
 
 1. No. of Suit    
 2. Name of Parties   
 
 3. Date of Decree/order of which 
execution is sought   
 
 4. Whether an appeal was filed against 
the decree / order under execution   
 
 5. Whether any payment has been 
received towards satisfaction of decree-
order   
 
 6. Whether any application was made 
previous to this and if so their dates 
and results   
 
 7. Amount of suit along with interest as 
per decree or any other relief granted 
by the decree   
 
8. Amount of costs if allowed by Court   
9. Against whom execution is sought   
10 In what manner court ’s assistance is 
sought   
 
PRAYER: 
The Decree Holder prays that the execution of the decree passed in the case may be granted.  
   
                                                                                                  Decree Holder 
Place:      Through 
Date:                                                                                      Advocate of Decree Holder  
 
 37    
 
VERIFICATION:              
Verified on…..at…… that the contents of this application are true to my knowledge or belief. 
                                                                                             
          Decree 
Holder  
                                                                         
  
Note: Students are required to fill in the details in the table above as per the facts of the c ase. 
 
* The application for execution shall be accompanied by a duly certified copy of the decree or 
order, or by the Original, or by the Minutes of decree or order until the decree or order is 
drawn up. Judge may allow execution before sealing of decree order. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 38    
PETITIONS UNDER THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955 
Before giving any model form of application under the matrimonial laws, it is  necessary to 
know what kind of petitions are contemplated in matrimonial causes. The Hindu Marr iage 
Act, 1955, has provided for the following important petition: 
 
1.Petition for restitution of conjugal rights (sec. 9) 
2.Petition for judicial separation (sec. 10) 
3.Petition for void or nullity of marriage (sec. 11) 
4.Petition for divorce by dissolution of marriage (sec. 13) 
5.Petition for maintenance pendent lite (sec.24) 
6.Petition for alimony and maintenance (sec. 25) 
7.Petition for custody of children (sec.26)  
Such reliefs are also obtained under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, the Indian Divorce A ct, 
1889, and other personal laws.  
Under the rules farmed by the Bombay High Court it is necessary to state the following facts 
in the petition for (i) judicial separation, (ii) Nullity of marri age, and (iii) Divorce in addition 
to the point given in O. VII, r. 1, C.P.C. and S. 20(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act .  (i) Place 
and date of marriage, (ii) name of the state of domicile of the wife and husband before and 
after marriage (iii) the principal permanent address where there is any cohabited incl uding the 
address where they raised together, (iv) birth or ages of such issues, (v) whether  there had 
been any proceeding in India, if so what wre they and with what result, and on behalf o f 
whom? (vi) Matrimonial offences or offence charged should be set out in separate paragraphs 
with time and place of its commission, (vii) property presented at or about the time of 
marriage and jointly owned by both husband and wife , and (viii)relief or reliefs prayed for. 
All matrimonial petitions shall lie in the Court of the District Judg e (Family Courts wherever 
established) within whose local limits of the jurisdiction the marriage was  solemnised, or 
within whose local limit of the jurisdiction the parties to the marriage l ast resided together, or 
within whose jurisdiction the respondent has been residing; but in the Metr opolis of Mumbai, 
Calcutta, Chennai and Ahmadabad, these petition shall lie in the City Civil Court  of the 
respective metropolitan town. 
 
By virtue of Section 14 Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Petition for Divorc e cannot be 
presented with in one year of marriage unless leave is taken from the court to presen t before 
on the ground of exceptional hardship. 
The Petitions under Hindu Marriage act are to be presented before Distric t Judge within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction 
(a) The Marriage was solemnized; or 
 39    
(b)  The respondent at the time of presentation of the petition, resides, or  
(c) The parties to the marriage last resided together, or 
(d) In case the wife is the petioner, where she is residing on the date of presentation of 
the petition, or  
(e) The petioner is residing at the time of presentation of the petition in  a case where the 
respondent is, at the time, residing outside the territories to which th Act extends, or has not 
been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons who w ould 
naturally have heard of him if he were alive. 
 
The districts in which the Family Courts have been established under Family Cour ts Act, 
1984, the petitions shall lie before the Principal Judge, Family Court ( Section 7 and 8 Fami ly 
Courts Act, 1984) 
Every petition shall state distinctly the following facts- 
(a) That the marriage of the petioner was solemnized with the respondent in accordance 
with Hindu rites and ceremonies on ….at…..and and affidavit to the effect has to be enclosed  
(b) That there is no collusion between the petitioner and the other party in present ing the 
petiotion for annulment of the marriage. This fact need not be pleaded in case of pet ition 
under section 11 of the Act. 
(c) In case the Petion for Divorce is filed on the ground of cruelty of the respondent, it 
has to be specificaaly pleaded that the petioner has not condoned the act of the respondent. 
(d)  Where the petition for divorce on mutual consent is filed, affidavits of both t he 
parties are to be attached.  
(e) In case of petition for Restitution of Conjugal rights, it has to be plea ded that the 
respondent has withdrawn from the company of petitioner without any reasonable caus e. 
(f) In the petition under the Act, the details regarding the status and place of resi dence of 
the parties to the marriage before the marriage and at the time of presentat ion of the petition 
have to be provided.  
* * * * * 
 
 
 
  
 40    
PETITION FOR RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS 
IN THE COURT OF PRINCIPAL JUDGE, FAMILY COURT (DISTT..), DELHI 
HMA PETITION NO.          OF     2017 
 
IN THE MATTER OF :   
X ………………  
s/o        
R/o ……………………………..      … PETITIONER  
VERSUS 
Y ………………  
w/o       
R/o ……………………………..      …RESPONDENT  
 
PETITION FOR RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS UNDER  SECTION 9 
OF THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955  
 
Most Respectfully Showeth: 
1. That a marriage was solemnized between the parties according to Hindu rites an d 
ceremonies on  ……… (date) at……..(place) . The said marriage is registered with the 
Registrar of marriage. A certified copy of the relevant extract from the H indu Marriage 
Register………  is filed herewith. An affidavit, duly attested declaring and affirming these 
facts is also attached. 
2. That the status and place of residence of the parties to the marriage before the marriage and 
at the time of filing the petition are as follows: 
                                      Husband                   Wife 
                                Status     Age    Place of  Residence     Status     Age   Place of Residence 
(i)   Before marriage 
(ii)  At the time of  
      filing the petition 
 (Whether a party is a Hindu by religion or not is as part of his or her status). 
3. That the (In this paragraph state the names of the children, if any, of the marri age together 
with their sex, dates of birth or ages). 
4. That the respondent has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the  
petitioner with effect from…………..(The circumstances under which the respondent 
withdrew from the society of the petitioner be stated in few paragrahs depend ing upon the 
facts ). 
5. That the petition is not presented in collusion with the respondent. 
 41    
6. That there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in filing the petition. 
7. That there is no other legal ground why relief should not be granted. 
8. That there have not been any previous proceedings with regard to the marriage by or on 
behalf of any party. 
Or 
There have been the following previous proceedings with regard to the marr iage by or on 
behalf of the parties: 
Serial  Name of       Nature of          Number        Name and           Result 
 Parties Proceedings with           and year of       location  
  Section of that Act          the case         of court  
(i)              
(ii) 
(iii) 
(Choose whichever is applicable to the facts) 
9. That the marriage was solemnized at……………. The parties last resided together 
at………… The parties are now residing at…………………(Within the local limit of the 
ordinary original jurisdiction of this Court.) 
10. That this Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to try and entertain this petition. 
 
PRAYER:  
 
In view of the above facts and circumstances, it is, therefore, most respectfully and humbly 
prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to grant a decree of restitution of conjuga l 
rights under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act in favour of the petitioner. 
Any other relief/order/Direction this Hon ’ble Court may deem fit in the interest of justice and 
equity. 
PETITIONER  
Through  
Place: Delhi 
Date:                   ADVOCATE 
VERIFICATION: 
The above named petitioner states on solemn affirmation that paras 1 to …………..of the 
petition are true to the petitioner ’s knowledge and paras……………….to………………. are 
true to the petitioner ’s information received and believed to be true by him/her. 
 
Verified at………………………………(Place)  
Dated………………….                 PETITIONER 
 
                [ NOTE :  AN AFFIDAVIT OF PETITIONER IS TO BE APPENDED ]  
* * * * * 
 42    
PETITION FOR JUDICIAL SEPARATION 
IN THE COURT OF PRINCIPAL JUDGE, FAMILY COURT (DISTT..), DELHI 
HMA PETITION NO. _______   OF    2017  
 
IN THE MATTER OF :   
X ………………  
s/o      
R/o ……………………………..      …. PETITIONER  
VERSUS 
Y ………………  
w/o       
R/o ……………………………..      ….RESPONDENT  
PETITION FOR JUDICIAL SEPARATION UNDER SECTION 10  
OF THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955  
Most Respectfully Showeth: 
1. That the marriage was solemnized between the parties according to Hindu rites  and 
ceremonies on ……… (date) at…………… (place). The said marriage is registered with the 
Registrar of marriage. A certified copy of the relevant extract from the H indu Marriage 
Register………….is filed herewith.  
2. That the status and place of residence of the parties to the marriage before the marriage and 
at the time of filing the petition are as follows: 
 
      Husband     Wife 
    Status       Age           Place of         Status       Age            Place of 
              Residence                    Residence 
 
    (i)  Before marriage 
   (ii) At the time of  
         filling the petition 
  
(Whether a party is a Hindu by religion or not is as part of his or her status). 
3. That the (In this paragraph state the names of the children, if any, of the marri age together 
with their sex, dates of birth or ages). 
4. That the respondent has……..(any one or more of the grounds available under section 10 
may be pleaded here. The matrimonial offences charged should be set in separate paragraphs 
with times and places of their alleged commission. The facts on which the c laim to relief is 
founded should be stated in accordance with the Rules and as distinctly as the nature of  the 
case permits.) 
5. (where the ground of petition is on the ground specified in clause (i) of section 13 (1). The  
petitioner has not in any manner been necessary to or connived at or condoned the act s 
complained of. 
 43    
6. (Where the ground of petition is cruelty). The petitioner has not in any manner condoned  
the cruelty. 
7. That the petition is not presented in collusion with the respondent. 
8. That there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in filing the petition. 
9. That there is no other legal ground why relief should not be granted. 
10. That there have not been any previous proceedings with regard to the marriage by or on 
behalf of any party. 
Or 
There have been the following previous proceedings with regard to the marr iage by or on 
behalf of the parties: 
Serial  Name of  Nature of             Number           Name and         Result 
 Parties Proceedings with              and year of       location  
  Section of that Act             the case           of court  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(Choose whichever is applicable to the facts) 
11. That the marriage was solemnized at……………. The parties last resided together 
at………… The parties are now residing at………………… (Within the local limit of the  
ordinary original jurisdiction of this Court) 
12. That this Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to try and entertain this petition 
PRAYER:  
In view of the above facts and circumstances, it is, therefore, most respectfully  and humbly 
prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to grant a decree of Judicial Separation under  
Section 10 of the Hindu Marriage Act in favor of the petitioner. 
Any other relief/order/Direction this Hon ’ble Court may deem fit in the intrest of justice and 
equity. 
PETITIONER  
         Through  
Place: Delhi 
Date:                   ADVOCATE 
 
VERIFICATION :  
 The above named petitioner states on solemn affirmation that paras 1 to____ of the 
petition are true to the petitioner ’s knowledge and paras____ to_______ are true to the 
petitioner ’s information received and believed to be true by him/her. 
Verified at________________ (Place) 
Dated__________________________  
PETITIONER 
 
[Note :  An affidavits of petitioner is to be appended. 
* * * * *   
 44    
PETITION FOR DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE BY A DECREE OF DIVORCE  
IN THE COURT OF PRINCIPAL JUDGE, FAMILY COURT (DISTT..), DEL HI 
HMA PETITION NO. ________   OF     2017 
 
IN THE MATTER OF :   
X___________________  
S/O 
R/O            … PETITIONER 
VERSUS 
Y____________________       
W/O 
R/O            …RESPONDENT 
 
PETITION FOR DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE BY A DECREE OF DIVORCE 
UNDER SECTION 13 OF THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955  
Most Respectfully Showeth: 
1. That the marriage was solemnized between the parties according to Hindu rites  and 
ceremonies after the commencement of the Hindu Marriage Act on_______ at 
_________.The said marriage is registered with the Registrar of marriage. A certi fied copy of 
the relevant extract from the Hindu Marriage Register………….is filed herewith.  
2. That the status and place of residence of the parties to the marriage before the marriage and 
at the time of filing the petition are as follows: 
      Husband     Wife 
    Status       Age          Place of          Status        Age          Place of 
             Residence                   Residence 
    (i)  Before marriage 
   (ii)  At the time of  
 filing the petition  
 (Whether a party is a Hindu by religion or not is as part of his or her status). 
3. (In this paragraph state the names of the children, if any, of the marriage together with their 
sex, dates of birth or ages). 
4. That the respondent…….(one or more of the grounds specified in section 13 may be 
pleaded here. The facts on which the claim to relief is founded should be stated in accordance  
with the Rules and as distinctly as the nature of the case permits. If ground as specified in 
clause (i) of Section 13 (i) is pleaded, the petitioner should give particulars as nearly as he 
can, of facts of voluntary sexual intercourse alleged to have been committed. T he 
 45    
matrimonial offences/offences charged should be set is separate paragraphs with t he time and 
places of their alleged commission.) 
5. (Where the ground of petition is on the ground specified in clause (i) of sub-se ction (1) of 
Section 13. The petitioner has not in any manner been accessary to or connived at or 
condoned the acts(s) complained of). 
6. (Where the ground of petition is cruelty). The petitioner has not in any manner condone d 
the cruelty. 
7. That the petition is not presented in collusion with the respondent. 
8. That there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in filing the petition. 
9. That there is not other legal ground why relief should not be granted. 
10. That there have not been any previous proceedings with regard to the marriage by or  on 
behalf of any part. 
Or 
There have been the following previous proceedings with regard to the marriage by or on 
behalf of the parties: 
Serial        Name of     Nature of                        Number                 Name            Result 
          Parties    Proceedings with           and year of             and location  
     Section of that Act         the case                of court  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(Choose whichever is applicable to the facts) 
11. That the marriage was solemnized at……………. The parties last resided together 
at………… The parties are now residing at………………… (Within the local limit s of the 
ordinary original jurisdiction of this Court.) 
12. That this Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to try and entertain this petition 
 
PRAYER: 
In view of the above facts and circumstances, it is, therefore, most respectfully and humbly 
prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pl eased to grant a decree of divorce under Section 13 
of HMA in favor of petitioner. 
Any other relief/order/Direction this Hon ’ble Court may deem fit in the intrest of justice and 
equity. 
PETITIONER 
         THROUGH 
ADVOCATE 
VERIFICATION: 
 46    
 The above named petitioner states on solemn affirmation that paras 1 to_____of the 
petition are true to the petitioner ’s knowledge and paras_____ to ______ are true to the 
petitioner ’s information received and believed to be true by him/her. 
Verified at____________________ (Place) 
Dated_____________________________  
PETITIONER 
[Note : An affidavit of the petitioner is to be appended.] 
 
* * * * * 
 
  
 47    
PETITION FOR DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE BY A DECREE OF DIVORCE BY 
MUTUAL CONSENT 
IN THE COURT OF PRINCIPAL JUDGE, FAMILY COURT (DISTT..), DELHI 
HMA PETITION NO. _______    OF    2017 
IN THE MATTER OF:   
X______________________     …            PETITIONER NO. 1  
AND  
Y_______________________     …            PETITIONER NO. 2 
 
PETITION FOR DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE BY A DECREE OF DIVORCE BY 
MUTUAL CONSENT UNDER SECTION 13-B(1) OF THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 
1955  
Most Respectfully Showeth: 
 1. That a marriage was solemnized between the parties according to Hindu ri tes and 
ceremonies  on______(date) at__________(place). A certified copy of the relevant extract 
from the Hindu Marriage Register is filed herewith. An affidavit, duly attested  statting these 
facts is filed herewith. 
 2. That the status and place of residence of the parties to the marriage befor e the 
marriage and at the time of filing the petition are as follows: 
      Husband     Wife 
    Status       Age           Place of            Status       Age         Place of 
              Residence                   Residence 
(i)   Before marriage 
(ii) At the time of  
      filing the petition 
 (Whether a party is a Hindu by religion or not is as part of his or her status). 
 3. (In this paragraph state the place where the parties to the marriage last  resided 
together and the names of the children, if any, of  the marriage together with thei r sex, dates 
of birth or ages.) 
 4. That the parties to the petition have been living separately since______ and have not  
been able to live together since then. (In few paragraphs, mention the reasons for no t being 
able to live together. In case there is a settlement between parties, the same can also be 
mentioned). 
 5. That the parties to the petition have mutually agreed that their marriage sho uld be 
dissolved. 
 6. That the mutual consent has not been obtained by force, fraud or undue influence. 
 7. That the petition is not presented in collusion. 
 48    
 8. That there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in instituting the 
proceedings. 
 9. That there is no other legal ground why relief should not be granted. 
 10. That the petitioners submit that this Court has jurisdiction to entertai n this petition. 
(Mention how the court has jurisdiction to entertain the petition). 
 
PRAYER: 
 In view of the above facts and circumstances, it is, therefore, most respectfully and 
humbly prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to grant a decree of divorce on mutal 
consent thereby dissolving the marriage between petitioner No. 1 and Petitioner oNo. 2 on the 
ground of mutual consent. 
 
PETITIONER NO. 1 
PETITIONER NO. 2 
        THROUGH 
          COUNSEL 
 
VERIFICATION: 
 The above named petitioner states on solemn affirmation that paras 1 to_____.of the 
petition are true to the petitioner ’s knowledge and paras______ to______ are true to the 
petitioner ’s information received and believed to be true by him/her. 
Verified at_________________(Place) 
Dated___________________________ 
PETITIONER NO. 1 
PETITIONER NO. 2 
 
[Note :  Separate affidavits of petitioner no. 1 and petitioner no. 2 to be appended] 
* * * * * 
  
 49    
DRAFT AFFIDAVIT IN MATRIMONIAL PLEADINGS 
 
IN THE COURT OF PRINCIPAL JUDGE, FAMILY COURT, ROHINI COURT 
(DIST…..) , DELHI.  
           H.M.A. PETITION NO.       /2015 
  
IN RE:- 
SMT. A 
W/O 
R/O                           …PETITIONER  
        VERSUS 
SH. B 
W/O 
R/O                          …RESPONDENT 
     
     
AFFIDAVIT OF SMT. A, W/O …., D/O…… AGED ABOUT………, R/O…………...  
 
I, the above named Deponent do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:  
 
1. That I am the petitioner in the aforesaid matter and as such I am well aware about  the 
facts of the present case and thus competent to depose the same.  
2. That my marriage was solemnized with the respondent, according to Hindu Ri tes and 
ceremonies on ……. at Delhi.  
3. That the present petition has not been presented in collusion with the respondent. 
4. That there is no improper or undue delay in filing the present petition.  
5. That the consent for filing the present petition has not been obtained by fr aud, force, 
pressure or undue influence.   
6. That the contents of the accompanying petition U/S ………of the Hindu Marriage  
Act. 1955, as amended upto date, have been drafted by my counsel as per my instructions and 
contents of the same have been duly read and understood by me and after fully understanding 
the contents of the same, I hereby state that the fact stated therein are all tr ue and correct to 
my knowledge and the fact stated therein may kindly be read as part and parcel of the present 
affidavit also as the contents of the same have not been reproduced herein for th e sake of 
brevity. 
     
                DEPONENT 
VERIFICATION: 
I, …………….., do hereby verify on this ____day of January, 2016 at Delhi that the contents 
of the above said affidavit are true and correct to my knowledge and information and nothing 
material has been concealed therefrom.                                                  
 
         DEPONENT 
*****
 50    
APPLICATIONS UNDER THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT 
PETITION FOR GRANT OF PROBATE  
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI 
(TESTAMENTARY & INTESTATE JURISDICTION) 
 
PROBATE CASE  NO. ……………… OF    2017  
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
THE ESTATE OF LATE SH……….(DECEASED)  
IN THE MATTER OF: 
X __________________________ 
S/O 
R/O               … APPLICANT/PETITIONER 
VERSUS 
1.      State of______________________ 
 
2.     Y __________________________   
 S/O 
 R/O       …RESPONDENTS 
 
PETITION FOR GRANT OF PROBATE  
To 
The Hon ’ble Mr Justice ………………, Chief Justice  
And his Companion Justices of this Hon ’ble Court 
 
Most Respectfully Showeth:  
 
1. That the present petition is filed by the petitioner for the grant of probat e in respect of 
the estate of deceased Late Sh………..S/O……. At the time of his death on………the 
deceased was residing…………….  
2. That during his lifetime before his death the deceased had bequeathed his estate in the 
manner specified in his last and final testament/will dated….., which was made by hi m in the 
sound state of mind. The Original Will is annexed as Annexure A. 
3. That the said will was duly made by the deceased in presence of the witness es whose 
names, addressed and signatures appear at the end of the Will. 
 51    
4. That by virtue of the said will, the deceased has bequeathed……(mention ho w the 
deceased has bequeathed his estate, name, relation and the individual share of the person and 
also mention whether he has excluded any of his legal heirs from the will.). 
5. That a description of the relatives of the deceased, and their respective residen ces are 
given below: 
(1) Son (Petitioner) 
(2) Brother, Sri………….resident of………………  
(3) Widow, Sreemati…………resident of………….  
(4) Mother, Sreemati………….resident of………….  
(5) Daughter, Sreemati……….resident of…………..  
(All the relatives will be made as Respondents) 
6. That the amount of the assets of the deceased which are likely to come to the hands of 
the petitioner, are detailed in Schedule-A, which is annexed with the present petit ion. The 
petitioner has set forth all the assets and liabilities with complete particu lars of the estate of 
the deceased as the petitioner could ascertain as of now with the best of his efforts.  
7. That so far as your petitioner has been able to ascertain and is aware there are no 
properties and effects other than those specified in the affidavit of assets. 
8. That the petitioner undertakes in case of any other properties and effects coming to his 
hands to pay Court-fees payable in respect thereof. 
9. That there is no legal impediment to the grant of probate in favour of the petitioner. 
10. That the petitioner undertakes to execute the Will of the testator as per  his wishes and 
undertake to take all steps as per his wishes and desires and directions of the dec eased as 
contained in the Will annexed. 
11. That the petitioner is claiming the probate of the Will and has filed thi s petition being 
the named executor in the Will. 
12. That to the best of the belief of the petitioner, no petition has been made to any  other 
court for the purpose of the said Will. 
13. That the deceased died and had a fixed abode within the territorial jurisdi ction of this 
Hon’ble Court. The immovable property is also situated within the jurisdiction of this 
Hon’ble Court and therefore this Hon ’ble Court has the jurisdiction to entertain, try and 
decide this petition.  
 
PRAYER: 
 
It is, therefore, most humbly prayed that: 
a. The probate of the Will be granted to the petitioner. 
b. Any other or further relief which this Hon ’ble Court may deem fit just proper and 
necessary may also be granted in favour of the petitioner. 
  
Place:              PETITIONER 
Date:                                                THROUGH                
 52    
                                                                                                      ADVOCATE 
 
VERIFICATION:  
 
I, …………., S/o…………, R/o…………, the petitioner in the above peti tion, declare that 
what is stated herein is true to the best of my information and belief.  Last para is the prayer to 
this Hon ’ble Court. 
 
 Verified at New Delhi on this …….. day of……..            
 
 
PETITIONER 
 
VERIFICATION: 
I, ………… S/o……… , R/o ……… , one of the witness to the last WILL and Testament of the 
Testator mentioned in the above petition, declare that I was present and saw the said Testator 
affix his signature on the WILL annexed to the above petition and acknowledge the writing 
annexed to the above petition to be his Last WILL and Testament in my presence. 
 
      WITNESS NO. 1 
VERIFICATION: 
I, ……..  W/o ……… , R/o ……….. , one of the witness to the last WILL and Testament of the 
Testator mentioned in the above petition, declare that I was present and saw the sai d Testator 
affix his signature on the WILL annexed to the above petition and acknowledge the writing 
annexed to the above petition to be his Last WILL and Testament in my presence. 
 
 
WITNESS NO. 2 
 
[NOTE  : To be supported by an affidavit] 
 
* * * * *  
  
 53    
PETITION FOR GRANT OF LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
IN THE COURT OF THE DISTRICT JUDGE (DISTRICT __________ ),  DELHI 
CASE NO………………UNDER A CT XXXIX OF 1925 
 
IN THE MATTER OF A PETITION FOR LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION  
OF THE ESTATE OF THE LATE ___________________________ 
IN THE MATTER OF :   
X ____________________________    …PETITIONER          
VERSUS 
 1. STATE _____________________ 
  2.  Y __________________________                            …RESPONDENTS 
PETITION FOR GRANT OF LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Most Respectfully Showeth:  
 
1. That the present petition is filed by the petitioner for the grant of letters of 
administration in respect of the estate of deceased Late Sh………..S/O……. At the time of 
his death on………the deceased was residing…………….  
2. That during his lifetime before his death the deceased had bequeathed his estate in 
the manner specified in his last and final testament/will dated….., which was made by  him in 
the sound state of mind. The Original Will is annexed as Annexure A. 
3. That the said will was duly made by the deceased in presence of the witnesse s whose 
names, addressed and signatures appear at the end of the Will. 
4. That by virtue of the said will, the deceased has bequeathed……(mention how the 
deceased has bequeathed his estate, name, relation and the individual share of the person and 
also mention whether he has excluded any of his legal heirs from the will.). 
5. That a description of the relatives of the deceased, and their respective res idences are 
given below: 
(1) Son (Petitioner) 
(2) Brother, Sr i………….resident of………………  
(3) Widow, Sreemati…………resident of………….  
(4) Mother, Sreemati………….resident of………….  
(5) Daughter, Sreemati……….resident of…………..  
(All the relatives will be made as Respondents) 
6. That the amount of the assets of the deceased which are likely to come to the hands of 
the petitioner, are detailed in Schedule-A, which is annexed with the present petit ion. The 
petitioner has set forth all the assets and liabilities with complete particu lars of the estate of 
the deceased as the petitioner could ascertain as of now with the best of his efforts.  
 54    
7. That so far as your petitioner has been able to ascertain and is aware there are no 
properties and effects other than those specified in the aff idavit of assets. 
8. That the petitioner undertakes in case of any other properties and effects coming to his 
hands to pay Court-fees payable in respect thereof. 
9. That there is no legal impediment to the grant of letters of admini stration in favour of 
the petitioner. 
10. That the petitioner undertakes to execute the Will of the testator as per his wishes and 
undertake to take all steps as per his wishes and desires and directions of the dec eased as 
contained in the Will annexed. 
11. That the petitioner is claiming the letters of administration of t he Will and has filed this 
petition being the beneficiary mentioned in the Will. 
12. That to the best of the belief of the petitioner, no petition has been made to any  other 
court for the purpose of the said Will. 
13. That the deceased died and had a fixed abode within the territorial jurisdict ion of this 
Hon’ble Court. The immovable property is also situated within the jurisdiction of t his 
Hon’ble Court and therefore this Hon ’ble Court has the jurisdiction to entertain, try and 
decide this petition.  
 
PRAYER: 
 
It is, therefore, most humbly prayed that: 
a. The Letters of Administration of the Will be granted to the petitioner. 
b. Any other or further relief which this Hon ’ble Court may deem fit just proper and 
necessary may also be granted in favour of the petitioner. 
  
Place:              PETITIONER 
Date:                                                THROUGH                
                                                                                                      ADVOCATE 
 
VERIFICATION:  
 
I, …………., S/o…………, R/o…………, the petitioner in the above petition, declare that 
what is stated herein is true to the best of my information and belief.  Last para is the prayer to 
this Hon ’ble Court. 
 
 Verified at New Delhi on this …….. day of……..            
 
 
PETITIONER 
 
VERIFICATION: 
 55    
I, …………S/o………, R/o………, one of the witness to the last WILL and Testament of the 
Testator mentioned in the above petition, declare that I was present and saw the said Testator 
affix his signature on the WILL annexed to the above petition and acknowledge the writing 
annexed to the above petition to be his Last WILL and Testament in my presence. 
 
      WITNESS NO. 1 
 
VERIFICATION: 
I, …….. W/o………, R/o……….., one of the witness to  the last WILL and Testament of the 
Testator mentioned in the above petition, declare that I was present and saw the said Testator 
affix his signature on the WILL annexed to the above petition and acknowledge the writing 
annexed to the above petition to be his Last WILL and Testament in my presence. 
 
 
WITNESS NO. 2 
 
[NOTE  : To be supported by an affidavit] 
 
* * * * *  
  
 56    
PETITION FOR THE GRANT OF SUCCESSION CERTIFICATE 
 
IN THE COURT OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL JUDGE, ROHINI COURT 
(DIST…..), DELHI 
SUCCESSION PETITION NO………OF……….  
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
X __________________________ 
S/O 
R/O               … APPLICANT/PETITIONER  
VERSUS 
1. STATE _____________________ 
 2.  Y __________________________                             
 S/O 
 R/O       …RESPONDENTS  
  
 
PETITION FOR THE GRANT OF SUCCESSION CERTIFICATE IN RESPECT OF 
THE GOODS, DEBTS AND SECURITIES ETC. OF …………………….(deceased) 
UNDER SEC.372 OF THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925. 
 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
(1) That the above- named ………...... died at ....(residen tial address)..... on or about the ........ 
day of ................, 20....... . 
(2) That the said Deceased died intestate and that due and diligent search has been m ade for a 
Will but none has been found. 
(3) That deceased named above hereinafter referred to being the said deceased who had be en 
during his lifetime till his death permanently residing and living at the abovesaid premises 
within the jurisdiction of this court and was by nationality and faith a Hindu citizen of India 
ruled by Dayabhaga /Tamil School of Hindu Law. 
(4) That the said Deceased at the time of his death left him surviving his onl y next-of-kin 
according to .............. law (state law) residing at……….  
(5) That the Petitioner as .............(state relation) of the Deceased claims to be ent itled to a 
share of the estate. 
(6) That there is no impediment under Section 370 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 or 
under any other provision of this Act or any other enactment to the grant of t he certificate or 
the validity thereof, if it were granted. 
(7) That the Petitioner has truly set forth in Schedule I hereto the securiti es in respect of 
which the certificate is applied for. The Succession Certificate is required for  purpose of 
............. (state the purpose for which succession certificate is required). The said as sets in 
respect of which the Succession Certificate is required are under the value of Rs................. 
 57    
(8) That no application has been made to any District Court or Delegate or to any High Court 
for Probate of any Will of the said Deceased or for letters of Admini stration with or without 
the Will annexed to his property and credits. 
(9) That no application for Succession Certificate in respect of and debt or securi ty belonging 
to the estate of the Deceased has been ............... (Or if made, state to what Court, by what 
person and what proceedings have been taken) made to any District Court or Delegate or to 
any High Court. 
(10) That ad valorem duty of Rs………….. payable relating to grant of Succession Certificat e 
hereunder prayed for has been paid. 
(11) That this application is made bonafide. 
 
PRAYER: 
 
The Petitioner therefore prays: 
(i) That a Succession Certificate, may be granted to the Petitioner in respect  of debts and 
securities set forth in Schedule I hereto with power to collect and/or receive and/or realise the 
same inclusive of all interests accrued thereon and to sell and/or negotiate and/or deal with the  
same without any impediment.  
(ii) That the Petitioner be exempted from presenting any security on that account .  
                 
PETITIONER 
        THROUGH 
          COUNSEL 
 
VERIFICATION: 
I ............ the Petitioner above named, do solemnly declare that what is stated in paragraphs  
............ is true to my knowledge and that what is stated in the remaining paragraphs is true to 
information received from ........... and believed to be true. 
 
.................. 
 
PETITIONER 
 
[NOTE  : To be supported by an affidavit] 
 
* * * * *  
 
 
  
 58    
 
PETITIONS UNDER CONSTITUTIONAL LAW  
 
WRITS 
Meaning and evolution of the concept of Writs: 
 
The term ‘writ petition ’ in its general connotation means a Petition filed before the competent 
Courts, having prerogative powers, when some special and inherited rights of the people are 
infringed bu the government or its officials. 
in the common laws of English this term is well settled as a ‘prerogative writ ’ which means a 
writ special associated with then king. It resembled the extraordinary author ity of the Crown/ 
Court. In English prerogative writs were issued only at the suit of the king but  later on it was 
made available to the subject also. 
 
Habeas Corpus  
 
Habeas Corpus  is a writ requiring the body of a person to be brought before a judge or Court. 
In other words, it is prerogative process for securing the liberty of the subject which affords 
an effective means of immediate reLease form unlawful unjustifiable detention whether in 
prison or in private custody. It is an ancient supreme right of the subject. Its object is the 
vindication of the right of the personal liberty of the subject. The Hig h Courts and The 
Supreme Court have got a very wide power of protecting the liberty of subjec ts, under 
Art.226 and Art.32 respectively of the Constitution. These powers are to be exercised o n 
certain fixed judicial principles and not in an arbitrary manner. The jurisd iction can be 
exercised if the Court is satisfied that the detention is illegal or improper, where the Court can 
also embark upon an inquiry as to whether the enactment under which a person is detained is 
proper or not. A proceeding of habeas corpus is essential of a civil character, and is concerned 
with the personal liberty of a citizen. However, the power is exercised on the cri minal side of 
the High Court ’s appellate jurisdiction. The High Courts and the Supreme Court exercise this 
power when satisfied that the matter is of urgency, and no other legal remedy is available. 
An application for habeas corpus  may be made by any person interested in the liberty of the 
detenue without unreasonable delay; and it must be supported by an affidavit of the petitioner. 
Ordinarily a rule nisi (to show cause) is issued by the Court in the fi rst instance. It is not open 
to Court to go behind the reasons given by Government for the detention, and it must see the 
motive of the impugned law and th e bonafide  of the Government. If the impugned detention 
has been induced by malafide and some other strenuous reasons and not for bonafide cause, it 
shall be quashed and the individual shall be set at liberty. 
 
Mandamus  
 
It is high prerogative writ of a most extensive remedial nature. The Supreme C ourt  and high 
court  have power respectively under Article 32 and Article 226 of the Indian constitution to 
issue this writ in the form of a command directing any person holding public offi ce under the 
government or, statutory  bodies or, corporation or, to an inferior Court exer cising judicial or 
 59    
quasi-judicial function to do a particular act pertaining to his office or du ty and which the 
court issuing the writ cinsiders to be the right of the petitioner and is in the interest   of justice. 
It is not restricted to persons charged with judicial or quasi-judicial; duty only. 
It is issued only when there is a specific legal right, but not specific leg al remedy to enforce 
that right. It lies for restoration, admission and election to office of a pub lic nature so long the 
office is vacant. It may , also, lie for the delivery , inspection and production of  public books, 
papers and documents provided that the petitioner has a direct tangible interest in suc h books, 
paper and documents. It lies for the performance public duties which are not discretionary and 
compel public officials to perform such public duties.  
Mandamus  will not be issued when any alternative remedy by way of appeal or any other 
renedy under any other statute is available. Article 32 is limited to the enforce ment of 
fundamental right of part III of the Constitution only. 
 
Certiorari  
 
The writ of Certiorari may be issued to any judge, Magistrate or person or body of person or 
authority vested with judicial or quasi-judicial functions. An order of Certiorari  is an order 
directing the aforesaid authorities and requiring them to transmit the record of the proceedings  
in any cause or matter to the High Court to be dealt with there. It may  be issued when the 
decision complained is of an authority having the legal duty to act judicially  or  quasi-
judicially, and the authority has either no jurisdiction, or there is an excess of  jurisdiction. 
Mainly it is issued for quashing decisions only. 
 
Prohibition  
 
The writ of prohibition is an order directed to an inferior Court or tribunal forbidding such 
Court or tribunal from continuing with the proceeding of any cause or matter. I t is an 
appropriate writ ‘to a tribunal which threatens to assume or assumes a jurisdiction not vested 
in it, so long as there is something in the proceeding s left to prohibit. ’ 
The difference between a writ of Prohibition  and Certiorari is that the former is issued to 
restrain a tribunal from doing an act before  it is actually done, while the lat ter may be issue 
during the course of the proceeding of an act and even after the act is done and the proceedi ng 
is concluded. Both can be issued to the person, or body, or tribunal if charged with jud icial or 
quasi-judicial duties. 
  
Quo Warranto  
 
It is a writ questioning a right of a person holding an office of a public  nature, and direct him 
to show an authority under which he is holding such office or exercising the right. I n older 
days it lay against the crown who claimed or usurped any office, franchise or  liber ty for 
holding an enquiry by what authority he support his claim. Now, it may be issued  any person 
holding the office of a public nature on the application of any person without alleging  the 
violation of his any specific right. 
 60    
Any member of the public acting in good faith and whose conduct otherwise did not disentitl e 
him to the relief can apply to the High Court for this writ. For inst ance, any registered 
graduate of any university can apply for the instance of this writ against any  member of 
University Syndicate or Executive Council or Academic Council or any such other st atutory 
body of that University. Likewise, a petition may lie against the Speaker, chairman or t he 
parliament of state legislation or any other statutory or local bodies. If the opposite party fails 
to support his claim, he will be ousted from the office and may be ordered to pay fine and cost 
of the petition. 
 
61 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI  AT NEW DELHI 
(WRIT JURISDICTION) 
 
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. ________OF2016 
 
IN THE MATTER OF : 
X _________ S/o _________R/o  ___________        PETITIONER 
VERSUS 
Muncipal Corporation of Delhi, 
Through   Its Commissioner      …   RESPONDENT  
 
WRIT PETITION UNDER ARTICLE 226 OF CONSTITUTION OF INDIA  
FOR ISSUANCE OF PREROGATIVE WRIT OF MANDAMUS  
OR ANY OTHER APPROPRIATE WRIT  
Most Respectfully Showeth: 
1. That the petitioner is a citizen of India residing at_______. The respondent is 
Muncipal Corporation of Delhi having their office at Town Hall, Chandni Chowk, Delhi. 
BRIEF FACTS :- 
2. That the petitioner is aggrieved by the illegal appointments of daily wage work ers by 
the M.C.D. office in defiance of Notification No. MCD/LF/01-103 dated 1.2.2014 which 
requires the M.C.D. to appoint only those people as Daily wage worker who are below th e 
age of 30 years as an 01.10.2014. The said Notification was issued after it was duly approved.  
3. That the petitioner is of 27 yrs of age and was working as a daily wage worker, w hen 
on 1.12.2014 his services were terminated without notice/prior intimation. The Peti tioner 
during his service worked to the satisfaction of his superiors. The responden t has appointed 
Sh. Ompal, Sh. Ram and Smt Maya in defiance of the said notification M.C.D./LF/01-/03 at 
01.02.2014 as all the three people namely Om Pal, Sh. Ram and Smt. Maya are more than 30 
years of age as on 01.10.2014. The about named persons were appointed in utter disregard of 
Notification. The respondent, however, removed the petitioner from service although 
petitioner met the requirements. That the Petitioner made representation to th e respondent 
vide letter dated 1.12.2014, 2.1.2015 and also met the commissioner personally and apprised 
them of his grievance, however nothing materialized. 
4. That in spite of oral and written representations the respondent have not  cared to act 
and are maintaining stoic silence on the whole issue. 
5. That the petitioner have thus approached the Hon ’ble court on amongst others the 
following grounds: 
GROUNDS:  
(a) Because the action of the respondent is contrary to law and good conscience. 
 62    
(b) Because the action of the respondent is arbitrary, unreasonable, irrational and 
unconstitutional. 
(c) Because the respondent have no right to play with the career of the petitioner. 
(d) Because the petitioner was removed from job inspite of the fact that he was below age 
and fulfilled all requirements. 
(e) Because the respondent appointed. Sh. Ompal, Sh. Ram and Smt Maya despite their 
being average and not meeting requirements of Notification No. MCD/LF/01-103 dated 
1.2.2014.  
(f) Because the action of the respondent is bad in law  
(g) That the Petitioner craves, leave of this Honorable Court to add, amend, and alter the 
grounds raised in this petition. 
6. That the cause of action in present case arose on 1.2.2014 when the respondent 
brought out the Notification No. MCD/LF/01-103 dated 1.2.2014., it further arose when on 
1.12.2014 the petitioner was removed from job inspite of the fact that he was below age and 
fulfilled all requirements, it further arose when respondent appointed. Sh. Ompal, Sh. Ram  
and Smt Maya despite their being average and not meeting requirements of Notificat ion No. 
MCD/LF/01-103 dated 1.2.2014; it further arose when representations were made to 
respondent orally and in writing on 1.12.2014, and 2.1.2015. The cause of action further aro se 
when respondent did not act inspite of the fact having brought to their not ice. The cause of 
action is continuing one. 
7. That the Petitioner has no other alternative efficacious remedy except to approach this 
Hon’ble Court by way of this writ petition. 
8. That the petitioner has not filed any other similar writ petition eithe r before this 
Hon’ble Court or before the Supreme Court of India. 
9. That there has been no undue delay in filing of this petition. 
10. That the Hon ’ble court has territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition. 
11. That the requisite court fee of Rs. 50/- has been affixed on this petition. 
PRAYER: 
The petitioner most humbly prays that this Hon ’ble Court may be pleased to :- 
(a) issue appropriate writ in the nature of mandamus or any other appropriate writ 
directing the Respondents to cancel the illegal appointment made  in disregar d of Notification 
No. MCD/LF/01-103 dated 1.2.2003  : and  
(b) issue necessary directions to appointment of petitioner and 
(c) issue any other further order/orders or direction/directions as this Hon ’ble Court may 
deem fit and appropriate no the facts and the circumstances of this case.  
                               PETITIONER 
Date:                                                                                                  THROUGH               
Place: ADVOCATE 
[NOTE :  The petition will be supported by an affidavit] 
 
  
 63    
WRIT PETITION (CRL.) FOR ENFORCEMENT OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI, AT NEW DELHI 
WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO.______ OF 2016 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
Mr._____ 
S/o Sh. ______, 
R/o ______                                …..Petitioner  
 
                                                    Versus 
1. Union of India, 
 Through  
 Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 Ministry of Finance,  
 Department of Revenue, 
 North Block, New Delhi-11001  
 
2. The Joint Secretary (PITNDPS), 
 to the Government of India, 
 Ministry of Finance, 
 Department of Revenue, 
 Room No.26, Church Road, 
 R.F.A. Barracks, 
 New Delhi -110001 
 
3. Director General,  
 Directorate of Revenue Intelligence 
 Delhi Zonal Unit, B-3 & 4, 6th Floor, 
 Paryavaran Bhavan, CGO Complex,  
 Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110003         …..Respondents  
  
PETITION UNDER ARTICLE 226 AND 227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
READ WITH SECTION 482 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
SEEKING ISSUANCE OF A WRIT OF MANDAMUS AND/OR ANY OTHER 
APPROPRIATE WRIT, ORDER AND/OR DIRECTION IN THE NATURE 
THEREOF, THEREBY DIRECTING THE RESPONDENTS TO PLACE ON 
RECORD THE DETENTION ORDER DATED 10.09.2013 PASSED IN RESPECT OF 
THE PETITIONER ISSUED UNDER SECTION 3(1) OF THE PREVENTION OF 
ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES 
ACT, 1988 BY THE RESPONDENT NO.2, ALONGWITH GROUNDS OF 
DETENTION AND RELIED UPON DOCUMENTS AND SIMILAR MATERIAL IN 
RESPECT OF OTHER CO-ACCUSED PERSONS AND FURTHER SEEKING 
ISSUANCE OF A WRIT OF CERTIORARI AND/OR ANY OTHER APPROPRIATE 
 64    
WRIT, ORDER AND/OR DIRECTION IN THE NATURE THEREOF, THEREBY 
QUASHING THE SAID DETENTION ORDER PASSED AGAINST THE 
PETITIONER 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH:  
1. That, vide the present petition the petitioner is challenging detention orde r dated 
10.09.2013 issued under section 3(1) of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Dr ugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 by the respondent no.2 against him, in respect of which he 
has recently come to know, when some officials, claiming themselves to be police officials, 
visited his abovementioned premises in the first week of this month for its e xecution. It is 
worth mentioning here that similar detention orders were issued against even other co-accused 
persons, namely X and Y, which have been revoked on the recommendation of the Advisory 
Board, who did not find sufficient grounds for detention of those respective detenus. Copy  of 
such a detention order bearing No. U-11011/1/2012- PITNDPS dated 10.09.2013 qua Mr. X 
is enclosed herewith as Annexure A. Copies of the grounds of detention passed in support of 
that detention order alongwith the list of relied upon documents are also enclosed herewith as 
Annexures B & C respectively.   
2. That the allegations, as revealed from the grounds of detention in respect of his sa id 
co-accused,  are that the petitioner was involved with other accused persons, in the acti vities 
of acquiring, possessing, hoarding, selling and exporting NDPS items. It is respectf ully 
submitted that all the allegations as made in the grounds of detention are false, f rivolous and 
motivated ones, which is also apparent from bare reading of grounds of detention and the 
documents, said to be relied upon at the time of passing the impugned detention order,  since 
even as per those allegations the petitioner has not committed any offence whats oever under 
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (in short Act). It is further 
submitted that in order to falsely implicate the petitioner in the matter  he was forced /coerced 
to make certain involuntary statements under section 67 of the Act, which have been dul y 
retracted. Not only this, it is respectfully submitted that, the petitioner  is made to understand 
that, even other co-accused were forced/coerced to make certain involuntary and i ncorrect 
statements from which even they have retracted at the first available opportunity.  
3. That, the petitioner ’s case is fully covered by the exceptions, as laid down, by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Alka Subhash Gadia ’s case. It is respectfully submitted that 
recently the Hon ’ble Supreme Court in Deepak Bajaj vs. State of Maharashtra, 2010 (4) SCC 
(Cri) 122 has summarized the law on the issue as under:  
(a) Five grounds mentioned in Alka Subhash Gadia case, on which Court can set aside 
detention order at pre-execution stage, are illustrative and not exhaustive. It was also 
reiterated that judgment of a court is not to be read mechanically as a Euclid ’s theorem nor as 
if it were a statute, hence, cannot be constructed as such.  
(b) It was held that entertaining petition against preventive detention order at pr e-execution 
stage should be an exception and not a general rule. However, if a person against whom a 
preventive detention order is passed comes to court at pre-execution stage and satisfies the 
court that such order is clearly illegal, there is no reason why the court should stay its hands 
and compel him to go to jail even though he is bound to be released subsequently because o f 
illegality of such order. If a person, is sent to jail, then even if he is  subsequently released, his 
 65    
reputation may be irreparably tarnished. Liberty of a persona is a precious fundamental right 
under article 21 and should not be lightly transgressed.  
(c) Non-placement of retractions of confessional statement and other relevant mat erial before 
detaining authority vitiates detention order even at pre-execution stage. Hence, on facts, it w as 
held that, as relevant materials were not placed before detaining authority, it v itiated the 
detention order.  
4. That, therefore, under these circumstances, it is respectfully submitted that the 
impugned detention order dated 10.09.2013 is highly illegal and a nullity in the eyes of law 
and the same is liable to be quashed on the following amongst other grounds which are 
without prejudice and in addition to each other.  
 
GROUNDS  
A. Because though the impugned detention order was passed on 10.09.2013, but till date 
the same has not been executed, despite the fact that throughout this period the petitione r was 
available at home and was attending all his daily routine activities. Not only  this, it is further 
respectfully submitted that, the petitioner was regularly appearing before the Trial Court in 
the prosecution proceedings, launched at the instance of the sponsoring authority . It is 
submitted that the long and undue delay in execution of the impugned detention order crea tes 
doubt about the genuineness qua subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority in detaining 
the petitioner preventively. Therefore, in view of the exceptions of the Alka Subhash Gadia ’s 
case the impugned detention order is liable to be quashed. Copies of the relevant order shee t 
of the Trial Court in prosecution proceedings is enclosed herewith as Annexure D.  
B. Because the petitioner says and submits that the alleged incident took place on  
23/24.10.11, however, no detention order was passed till 10.09.13, which clearly shows that 
there has been long and undue delay in passing the impugned detention order, which has 
snatched the nexus between the purpose of detention and the allegations, as made i n the 
grounds of detention. Therefore, it is apparent that the detention order has been passed on 
stale incident and on this ground also the impugned detention order is liable to be quashed, 
more particularly when similar detention orders under similar circumstances have already 
been revoked by the respondent no. 2, on the recommendation of the Advisory Board, who 
did not find sufficient cause for issuance of those detention orders.  
C. Because since the date of the passing of the impugned detention order, which is for a  
period of one year only, the petitioner has not come to the adverse notice of any law enforcing 
authority. Therefore, under these circumstances, purpose of the said detention order has 
already been served and nothing would be achieved by sending the petitioner into custody 
pursuant to the impugned detention order, which was passed about more than 1 ½ year back 
for his detention for a period of one year. It is respectfully submitted that, under  these 
circumstances, purpose of passing the impugned detention order is no more preventive. 
Therefore on this ground also the impugned detention order is liable to be quashed. 
D. Because the petitioner/ detenu is a poor person and has clean antecedents. It is 
respectfully submitted that he is the sole bread earner of his family, which i ncludes his old 
ailing parents, wife and minor children. It is further submitted that grave inju stice has been 
done to the petitioner by executing the impugned detention order, which is even otherwise  
 66    
very draconian in nature, being violative of principles of natural justice. It  is submitted that, 
the impugned detention order is unconstitutional.  
E. It is further respectfully submitted that initiation of mere prosecution proc eedings 
were sufficient to prevent the petitioner from indulging in the alleged p rejudicial activities. 
Therefore, on this ground also the impugned detention order is liable to be quashed. 
F. Because the impugned detention order is not only contrary to the facts of the case but  
also contrary to the settled principles of law. 
 
5. That, the annexures annexed with this petition are true copies of their originals. 
6. That, no similar petition has been filed either before this Hon ’ble Court or any other 
Court including the Hon ’ble Supreme Court of India. 
7. That, the petitioner has no other efficacious remedy other than to file the present 
petition. 
PRAYER: 
In view of foregoing it is most respectfully prayed that: 
(i) a writ of mandamus and/or any other appropriate writ, order and/or direction i n the 
nature thereof may kindly be issued thereby directing the respondents to place on r ecord the 
abovementioned detention order, issued under section 3(1) of the Prevention of Illicit  Traffic 
in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 (in short Act) by the respondent 
no.2 against the petitioner dated 10.09.2013 alongwith the grounds of detention and relied 
upon documents, besides the similar material in respect of other co-accused/ detenus, w ho 
were detained earlier on the same set of facts and circumstances; and 
 (ii) further a writ of certiorari and/or any other appropriate writ , order and/or direction in 
the nature thereof may kindly be issued thereby quashing the abovementioned detention orde r 
dated 10.09.2013, passed by the respondent no.2; and/or 
(iii) any other order, as may be deemed fit and proper under the facts and circumstances of 
the case may also be passed in the matter in favour of the petitioner and against t he 
respondents.  
Petitioner 
New Delhi 
Dated:                                                        Through 
Advocates 
 
  
 67    
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) 
Article 136 of the Constitution of India vests the Supreme Court with the power to grant 
Special leave to appeal against any decree, order or, judgement in any cause or matter 
passed by any court or tribunal in the country.                                                                      
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
ORDER XXI, Rule 3(1) (a),  SUPREME COURT RULES 2013 
(Under Article 136 of the Constitution of India)  
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) No. OF 2016 
(Arising out of Judgment and order dated 14.12.2015 passed in Writ Petition No. 5427 of 
2004 by Hon ’ble High Court of Judicature of Bombay Bench at Aurangabad) 
 
Between                                                    Position of the Parties 
                                    In the High Court       In this court 
Vasant S/o Shankar Bhavsar 
Age: Major, Occu: 
Residing at & Post Faijpur, 
Taluka Yawal, Dist: Jalgaon. …                                Petitioner         Petitioner 
 AND    
1. D _____ S/o  _____________ …                            Contesting     Contesting  
R/o _____________________,  …                                         Respondent        Respondent  
 Taluka: Bhusawal, Dist: ____ 
 
2. H ______ S/o _______________,  …                         Contesting        Contesting 
R/o ___________________,  …                             Respondent      Respondent  
 Taluka: Bhusawal, Dist: ____ 
 
3. C_____ S/o ______________ …                            Contesting       Contesting  
 R/o _____________________ …                         Respondent           Respondent 
 Taluka: Bhusawal, Dist: ____ 
 
4. P ____ S/o _______________ 
R/o:_____________________, …                                          Contesting      Contesting  
Dist:__________ __________…                                           Respondent     Respondent  
 
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION UNDER ARTICLE 136 OF 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
To 
The Hon ’ble Chief Justice of India and His Companion Justice of the Supreme Court of India. 
 68    
The humble petition of the petitioner above named most respectfully showeth: 
1. That the present petition has been filed seeking special leave to appeal i n the final 
judgment and order dated 14.9.2012.201508 of the Hon ’ble High Court of Judicature of 
Bombay Bench at Aurangabad in Civil Writ Petition No.5427 of 2004 titled “Vasant S/o Sh. 
Shankar Bhavsar Versus Digambar & Ors. ” which was dismissed by the Hon ’ble High Court. 
2. QUESTIONS OF LAW:  
 That the following questions of law arise for consideration herein: 
a) Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case the Hon ’ble High Court was 
justified in dismissing the Civil Writ Petition  
3. Declaration in terms of Rule 3 (2):  
That the Petitioner states that no other petition for special leave to appeal has bee n filed by 
him against the judgment and order impugned herein.  
4. Declaration in terms of Rule 5: 
The Petitioner states that the Annexures filed along with the special leave petition are true 
copies of the pleading ’s and documents which formed part of the records of the case in the 
court below against whose order the leave to appeal is sought for  in this petition.  
5. GROUNDS:  
That the special leave to appeal is sought on the following grounds: 
I) Because the High Court had erred in passing the impugned judgment.  
II) Because the High Court could not have allowed the errors to prevail by dismissing the writ 
petition. 
III) Because the impugned judgments and orders of Hon ’ble High Court and of Maharashtra 
Revenue Tribunal, Mumbai, dated 24.10.1997, of the Sub-Divisional Officer, Bhusawal dated 
31.3.1997, of Tehsildar and Agricultural Lands Tribunal, Yawal, dated 1.10.1996 suffer from 
error apparent on the face of record. 
IV) Because the reasoning of the authorities mentioned above that the will  executed by 
Vishnu on 7.1.1968, the original tenant and owner under the Bombay Tenancy Act; and the 
registered Hakka Sod Patrak dated 18.12.1981 executed by Digambar S/o Vishnu do not 
come in the definition of transfer as envisaged in Section –43 of the Bombay Tenancy Act, is 
unsustainable in law. 
V) Because with respect to the Authorities below that the incidents of tr ansfer mentioned in 
Section 43 of Bombay Tenancy Act viz. sale, Gift, Exchange, mortgage, lease, assignment or  
partition are not the only incidents of transfer to be considered in reference to S ection 43 of 
the Act but they are only mentioned by way of examples. It does not mean the oth er incidents 
of transfer like will or Hakka Sod Patrak do not amount to transfer and are not to be 
considered by the authorities under the Bombay Tenancy Act.  
VI)  Because the ground No. V above is further supported by other provisions of Bombay 
Tenancy Act. For example Section 32-R lays down that purchaser U/s. 32 of the Act  is to be 
evicted if he fails to cultivate land personally. Section 43 of the Act lay dow n restrictions on 
 69    
the purchaser not to transfer the purchased land under the Act without the sanction of the 
Collector. Section 43 (2) of the Act says “any transfer or partition of land in contravention of 
Sub-Section (1) shall be invalid ”. Section 70 (mb) lays down a duty on Mamlatdar to decide 
U/s. 48B or 84 C whether a transfer or acquisition of land is invalid and t o dispose off land as 
provided in Section 84 C. Section 83 A (1) lays down that no person shall acquire land by 
transfer which is invalid under any of the provisions of the Act. Section 83 A( 2) lays down 
that a persons acquiring land by invalid transfer shall be liable to consequences as  laid down 
in Section 84 or 84 C of the Act. Section 84 of the Act provides for summary evicti on of 
unauthorised or wrongful occupant of the land. Section 84 C of the Act gives authority  to the 
Mamlatdar to hold enquiry of any such illegal transfer and to decide it accordingly. Section 84 
C (3) lays down that land declared to be invalidly transferred to vest in the State. Section 84 C 
(1) gives the power to the Collector to dispose the land which are declared to be inv alidly 
transferred.  
VII) Because in the Section 32 R, 43 (1), 43 (2), Section 70 (mb), Section 83 A (1), 83 A ( 2), 
Section 84, 84 C, 84 C(3) and 84 CC (1) of the Bombay Tenancy Act, at many  places the 
words “any transfer ” are used as these sections are having wider scope covering all types of 
transfers, and not only to the six kinds of transfers mentioned in Section 43 of the Act. 
Therefore the reasoning of these authorities below that the will and Hakka Sod Patrak are not 
covered by Section 43 of the Act do not stand good in law. 
VIII) Because the will and registered Hakka Sod Patrak have resulted into permane nt transfer 
in perpetuity of this land purchased by the tenant U/s 32 of the Act, without sa nction from the 
Collector U/s. 43 of the Act and therefore the application filed U/s 43 read w ith section 84 C 
of the Act was liable to be allowed completely.  
IX)   Because the definition of transfer as given in Section 5 Chapter II in Transfer of property 
Act is totally neglected by the learned three authorities below.  
X) Because the learned authorities below have not taken into consideration all the 
circumstances of this case while deciding the matter. 
XI)  Because the judgments and orders of three authorities below are contrary to law and good 
conscience.  
XII) The petitioner crave, leave of this Honorable Court to add, amend, and alter the gr ounds 
raised in this petition 
6. GROUNDS FOR INTERIM RELIEF:  
A. That the petitioner apprehends that the respondents may sell, alienate or part with 
the property illegally.  
 7. MAIN PRAYER:  
 Wherefore, it is respectfully prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may kindly be pleased to: 
a)  Grant the special leave petition from the final judgment and order dated 14.12.2015 o f the 
Hon’ble High Court of Judicature of Bombay Bench at Aurangabad in Civil Writ Petiti on 
No.5427 of 2015 titled “Vasant S/o Sh. Shankar Bhavsar Versus Digambar & Ors. ” And 
 70    
b)Be pleased further to pass such other order or orders as deemed fit and proper in the facts, 
reasons and other attending circumstances of the case.  
 PRAYER FOR INTERIM RELIEF:  
(a) It is prayed that interim directions be issued to the Respondent may be directed not to sell, 
alienate or  part with the property. Gat No. 2752 comprising of Survey No. 638/1, 638/3-A, 
639/1, 639/3 area measuring 2 Hectares 87 Ares situated at village Nhavi, Taluka Yawal. 
(b)Be pleased further to pass such other order or orders as deemed fit and pr oper in the facts, 
reasons and other attending circumstances of the case.  
AND FOR THIS ACT OF KINDNESS THE PETITIONER SHALL EVER REMAIN 
GRATEFUL AS IN DUTY BOUND 
Drawn and Filed by: 
New Delhi 
Date of drawn:       Advocate for the Petitioner 
Date of filing:    
[NOTE  : To be supported by an affidavit] 
 
* * * * * 
  
 71    
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
(CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICATION) 
ORDER XXII, Rule 2(1), SUPREME COURT RULES 2013 
(Under Article 136 of the Constitution of India) 
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL) No._________  OF     2016 
(FROM THE FINAL JUDGEMENT AND ORDER DATED _____ PASSED BY THE 
HIGH COURT OF  _________ AT ________ IN CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. ___ OF  _____) 
 
IN THE MATTER OF:- 
N. _________ S/o _____________,  
R/o _________________________ 
lodged in Model Jail, Chandigarh  …     PETITIONER/ORIGINAL ACCUSED  
 
VERSUS 
 
1. Union Territory of ______ 
through Home Secretary, 
Secretariat, ____________  …           RESPONDENT 
 
2. S Singh S/o ___ R/o _____.  …            PROFORMA RESPONDENT/  
                                                                                                 ORIGINAL  ACCUSED. 
PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL UNDER ARTICLE 136 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
To,  
 The Hon ’ble Chief Justice of India 
 And his Companion Justices of 
 The Supreme Court of India 
 
The humble petition of the above named petitioner most respectfully showeth: 
1.  That the present Special leave Petition (Criminal.) is filed against or der dated 
26.11.2015 of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh, in Criminal Appeal No.  
305-DB of 2013, titled “Subeg Singh versus The State Union Territory of Chandigarh ” 
whereby the Hon ’ble Court dismissed the appeal of the petitioner. 
2. That the present petition raises an important question of law for considerat ion before 
this Hon ’ble Court. _______________________. 
 72    
3. Declaration under Rule 2(2)  - That the Petitioner states that no other petition for special 
leave to appeal has been filed by him against the judgment and order impugned herein.  
4. Declaration under Rule 4 - The Petitioner states that the Annexures filed along with the 
special leave petition are true copies of the pleading ’s and documents which formed part of 
the records of the case in the court below against whose order the leave to appea l is sought for 
in this petition. 
5. BRIEF FACTS  
On the night intervening 11/12.2.2013 murder of Shri Bachna Ram, who was a cook and 
domestic servant of Shri Devinder Singh Brar, resident of house No. 53, Sector  28- A 
Chandigarh, was committed in the kitchen of his house when Shri Devinder Singh Brar and  
his sister Smt. Gurmail Kaur were in Aurngabad. The F.I.R. was registered on the sta tement 
of Capt Jagat Pal Singh PW-11 who resides in the neighborhood of house No. 53. The offence 
came into light when Smt. Babita the sweeper of House No. 53 informed Capt. Jagat  Pal 
Singh PW-11. On the information given by Catpain Jagat pal Singh, PW-11 S.I. Puran Chand 
aforesaid recorded D.D.R. No. 46 dated 13.2.2013 in the Rojnamcha of the police-Station 
East, Chandigarh and formed a Police party and came to House No. 53. The investigation of 
this case remained pending with S.I. Puran Chand up to 8.3.2013. The police remained 
unsuccessful in tracing out the crime till 8.4.2013. On that day, Balwan Singh S.I. PW -24 of 
the CIA staff, took over the investigation of this case. He along with mem bers of the police 
party including S.I. Partap Sing PW-23 visited House No. 53. Sector 28-A Chandigarh where  
Mr. Devinder Singh Brar PW-12 was present. In his presence, appellant Gurdev Singh was 
interrogated and he made certain disclosures after which the further story unfolded.  After 
completion of the investigation the accused were challaned on the charges under Secti on 120-
B, 392/120-B, 302/34, 302/114, I.P.C. The accused pleaded not guilty to the charge framed 
against them and claimed trial. The Court of Sh. B.S.Bedi, Session Judge, Chandigarh 
convicted the accused U/s. 120-B, 302/34 and in alternative 302/114 IPC. 
6.  That the copy of the Trial Court judgment  passed by Sessions Judge Chandigarh 
convicting and sentencing the petitioner in Sessions Case No.15 of 2013 U/s. 120-B, 302/34 
and in alternative 302/114 IPC is Annexure P-1. 
7. GROUNDS  
Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order, the Petitioner approaches this 
Hon’ble Court by way of Special Leave Petition on the following amongst other grounds:- 
A. Because the judgment and order dated 26.11.2015passed by the Hon ’ble High Court 
which dismissed the appeal of the appellant is contrary to law and facts and hence the same is 
liable to set aside both on the point of law and equity. 
B. Because the prosecution only produced the partisan or the interested persons as 
witnesses in order to prove the commission of crime by the petitioner. This fact doubts the 
truthfulness of the case of prosecution.  
C. Because the prosecution has suppressed the origin and genesis of the occurrence and 
has thus not presented the true version. 
 73    
D. Because the prosecution has miserable failed to prove its case beyond doubt agai nst 
the petitioner. 
E. Because the witnesses have not deposed correctly and there is discrepancy in the 
depositions of witnesses and the conviction of the petitioner is bad. 
F. Because the Hon ’ble Court ignored the fact to be considered in the case was as to 
whether the evidence of PW-5 Gurpartap Singh, the approver, was reliable and if so w hether 
there was corroboration to his evidence on material particulars so as to warrant  conviction. It 
is high-lighted that it was a case of no evidence from the side of the prose cution and, 
therefore, the evidence of the approver and other circumstances, corroborated by his statement 
cannot be the base of conviction of the appellant. 
G. Because Gurpartap Singh PW-5 lost his status as an approver when he appeared 
before the learned Committing Magistrate and his statement was recorded as PW-1 on 
11.9.1995. The relevant portion of the same is as follows:-  
 “Before 7.4.2012 I had no conversation with anybody. On 7.4.2012 my self, accused 
Subeg Singh and accused Nand Singh were coming from Rajpura to Chandigarh on a 
Motorcycle. I had come to Chandigarh on that date for the first time. When we crossed 
Zirakpur, we were apprehended on the first Chowki by the Chandigarh Police. From there we 
were apprehended and implicated in this case. I do not know where Sector 28 is. I was 
threatened by the Police that I should give a statement in favour of the Polic e otherwise I 
would be involved in a TADA case and should suffer imprisonment for whole of th e life. In 
the Jail also, the police people used to visit me and threaten and intimidate m e. I made 
statement before the Chief Judicial Magistrate on account of fear of the police. I have nothin g 
more to say about this Case ” 
H. Because the above statement will show that the tender of pardon given to Gurpartap 
Singh by the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Chandigarh on 1.5.2012 was no, more 
available and he lost the status of an approver. It is stated here that the Learned Com mitting 
Magistrate was entirely wrong in permitting the cross-examination of Gurpa rtap Singh by the 
prosecution by declaring him hostile. This could not have been done for the simple reason that 
he did not attain the status of a witness. This being so, all the proceedings after 11.9.2012 
with regard to the examination of Gurpartap Singh as a witness by the Learned commi tting 
Magistrate or by the Learned Sessions Judge, Chandigarh stood vitiated being totall y illegal. 
It is submitted that from the date 11.5.2012 when Gurpartap Singh made the above statement , 
he is to be taken as an accused and not an approver, he had made altogether different 
statement from the one alleged to have been made after alleged acceptance of tender of 
pardon.  
8. Grounds for interim relief 
9. PRAYER 
 The Petitioner herein prays that this Hon ’ble Court may graciously be pleased to: 
a) Grant special leave to appeal to the petitioner against judgment and order dated 
26.11.2015 of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh, in Criminal Appeal No.  
 74    
305-DB of 2013, titled “Subeg Singh & Anr., versus The State Union Territory of 
Chandigarh ” 
b) Pass any other order which this Hon ’ble Court may deem fit and proper in the facts and 
circumstances of the case in favour of the Petitioner. 
11. Prayer for interim relief 
 DRAWN AND FILED BY 
NEW DELHI                       ADVOCATE FOR THE PETITIONER 
DRAWN ON: ______________ 
FILED ON: ________________   
[NOTE  : To be supported by an affidavit]  
 
***** 
 
 
 
  
 75    
PLEADINGS UNDER CRIMINAL LAW  
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF BAIL 
 
IN THE COURT OF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE (DISTRICT __________), 
DELHI 
BAIL APPLICATION NO. __________ OF       2017   
IN THE MATTER OF: 
 
X _______  
S/o _______  
R/o __________                  …..APPLICANT  
VERSUS  
 
STATE                                 ….RESPONDENT/ COMPLAINANT 
                                                                               FIR NO. ________ 
  U/S_________________ 
                                                                           POLICE STATION _____________________ 
 
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF BAIL UNDER SECTION 437 OF CODE OF 
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
       Most Respectfully Showeth: 
1. That the accused above named was arrested by the police on ……  and is in 
judicial custody since then. It is alleged that on …… , the accused was suspiciously moving on 
Baba Kharak Singh Marg, New Delhi when the police apprehended him, conducted the search 
and recovered 3 gms. of smack from his pocket.  
2. That the accused has been falsely implicated in the instant case and he has 
nothing to do with the alleged offence. 
3. That nothing was recovered from the possession of the accused or at his ins tance 
and the so called case property has been planted upon the accused. 
4. That the accused is a law abiding citizen and belongs to a very respectable family. 
He has never indulged in any illegal activities and commands respect and admiratio n his 
locality. 
5. That on…….(date) , the accused found some persons selling smack near 
Hanuman Mandir Cannaught Place, New Delhi. The accused immediately reported the mater 
to police as the result of which police also arrested some of the persons. Since that ti me, those 
persons who were arrested at the instance of the accused, were threatening th e accused to 
 76    
falsely implicate him in a criminal case in collusion with police. The acc used made a 
complaint in this regard to the Dy. Commissioner of Police, true copy of which i s annexed 
hereto as Annexure- A. 
6. That after the said complaint, the accused was called by the Vigilance 
Department, Delhi Police who enquired into his complaint. True copy of the sa id notice 
issued by the Vigilance Cell is enclosed herewith as Annexure- B. 
7. That it is unimaginable that the accused who made a complaint against the sellers  
of smack, would himself indulge in such activities. 
8. That the accused is a permanent resident of Delhi and there are no chances of his 
absconding in case he is rel eased on bail. 
9. That there is no chance of the accused absconding or tempering with the 
prosecution evidence in the event of reLease on bail. 
10. That the accused undertakes to join the investigation as and when directed to do 
so.  
11. That the accused is not a previous convict and has not been involved in any case 
of this nature except the present case. 
12. That the present case is a result of clear manipulation by the police. 
13. That the accused from all accounts is an innocent person. 
PRAYER: 
  It is therefore respectfully prayed that the accused may kindly be release d on bail 
during the pendency of this case. 
         APPLICANT                                  
Place:       THROUGH 
Date : .................                             ADVOCATE 
 
Note: To be supported by affidavit of Pairokar and Vakalatnama duly attested by Jai l 
Authorities.  
* * * * * 
 
  
 77    
APPLICATION FOR THE GRANT OF ANTICIPATORY BAIL  
IN THE COURT OF SESSIONS JUDGE (DISTRICT __________), DELHI 
TIS HAZARI COURTS DELHI 
 
ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION  NO. _______  OF        2017 
IN THE MATTER OF;- 
X _______  
S/o _______  
R/o __________                                             … APPLICANT 
VERSUS 
STATE                …RESPONDENT/ COMPLAINANT 
 
FIR NO. _______  OF 2017 
UNDER SECTION______________________ 
POLICE STATION______________________ 
 
APPLICATION FOR THE GRANT OF ANTICIPATORY BAIL UNDER  
SECTION 438 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
 
Most Respectfully Showeth: 
1. That the Applicant is a youngman aged 20 years residing at ______, Delhi. He is also 
a Director of M/s. ABC Ltd. which is a very leading company engaged in the manufactur e of 
electrical appliances. 
2. The Applicant is a very respectable person of his locality and is a peace loving 
citizen. 
3. That the Applicant was on friendly terms with Miss Y major daughter of t he 
Complainant. However, the relationship of the Applicant with Miss Y was not liked by  her 
family members so much so that they had stopped Y from meeting the Applicant and had 
threatened her that in case she meet the Applicant, they will implicate the Applicant in some 
false criminal case. 
4. That Miss. Y had also written number of letters to the Applicant calling upon hi m to 
marry her as she had feared that her family members may sabotage her relati onship with the 
Applicant, which shows that family members of Miss. Y were deadly against the A pplicant 
and were looking for some opportunity to falsely implicated him in some false c riminal case 
in order to pressurize him to severe his relationship with Y. 
 78    
5. That on …….(date) , the Applicant had gone to meet his friend, who is residing in the 
neighborhood of Miss Y. When the Applicant reached the house of his friend, he was 
suddenly attacked by father, uncle and brother of Miss Y as a result of which he fell down and 
sustained abrasion/injuries. The Applicant ’s friend came to the rescue of the Applicant and 
with great difficulty; the Applicant was saved from the clutches of M iss Y ’s family members 
by other neighbors and passersby. 
6. That the police has registered a false FIR against the Applicant. A bare perusal  of the 
said FIR reveals that the brother of Miss Y attacked the Applicant and not vice-versa. As a 
mater of fact, the aggressor has manipulated with the police and has falsely impl icated the 
Applicant. The Applicant is in fact the victim at the hands of the Complainan ts who have 
conspired with the police and got this case registered against them. The photosta t copies of 
the letters written by Miss Y to the Applicant are annexed herewith. 
7. That the FIR registered against the Applicant is absolutely false and incorrect . The 
Applicant is not at all involved in the alleged offence and has been falsely i mplicated by the 
police. 
8. That the Applicant apprehends that he may be arrested in pursuance of the aforesaid  
false and fictitious complaint. 
9. That the police officials have visited the premises of the Applicant in his absence and 
there is every likelihood of his being arrested in the instant case. 
10. That the Applicant undertakes to join the investigation as and when directed to do so. 
11. That the Applicant is a permanent resident of Delhi and there is no chance of hi s 
absconding in case he is granted anticipatory bail.      
12. That the Applicant has never been involved in any criminal case except the prese nt 
one. 
PRAYER: 
 It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that the Applicant be released on bail in the 
event of his arrest and appropriate directions in this regard may pl ease be sent to the 
concerned Investigating officer/S.H.O. Any other order/orders which this H on’ble Court may 
deem fit and proper on the facts and circumstances of this case may also be passed. 
 
APPLICANT 
Place:        THROUGH 
Date:                           ADVOCATE 
        
 
[Note : To be supported by affidavit] 
* * * * *   
 79    
COMPLAINT UNDER SECTION 138, THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT  
 
IN THE COURT OF CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE ,  …..COURT  
(DISTRICT __________), DELHI 
 
CRIMINAL COMPLAINT NO. ________  OF     2017 
 
X ________________  
S/o _____________  
R/o                    ….COMPLAINANT 
VERSUS 
Y _________________   
S/o ________________   
R/o                                                     .…ACCUSED 
 
JURISDICTION : P. S. _____________ 
 
COMPLAINT UNDER SECTION 138 OF THE  
NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881  
 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH:  
1. That the Complainant is the owner and landlord of flat bearing No. _______, New Delhi.  
2. That the accused is a tenant under the Complainant in respect of flat bearing  No. _______ 
New Delhi, comprising of two bed-rooms, drawing-cum-dining room, study room, kitchen -
room, two bathrooms-cum-toilets and a terrace at a monthly rent of Rs. 2500/- f or residential 
purposes w.e.f. __________. True copy of the Lease-deed dated __________ is annexed 
hereto as Annexure – ‘A’ 
3. That on _______ the accused handed over cheque bearing Nos. ________ dated 
________for Rs. _____ drawn on _________ Bank, New Delhi to the complainant towards 
rent of the said premises for the months of September, October and November, ……  the said 
original cheque is annexed hereto as Annexure – B. 
4. That the Complainant deposited the said cheque in his account with the ………  (bank 
name) on ______(date) but the same was dishonoured on presentation with the remarks 
‘REFER TO DRAWER ’. The original returning memos dated ________ in respect of the said 
cheque is annexed hereto as Annexure – ‘C’. 
5. That vide letter dated ……. , the Complainant called upon the accused to make the payment 
of the amount covered by the dishonoured cheque. The said letter was sent to the accused by 
Regd. A.D. as well as U.P.C. However, the accused failed to make the payment of the a mount 
in question to the Complainant. 
6.That the cheque in question were returned unpaid because the amount standing to the credi t 
in the Accused ’s account was insufficient to honour the cheque in question and as such the 
 80    
Accused is liable to be prosecuted an punished under Section 138 of the Negotiable  
Instruments Act, 1881 as amended upto-date.  
7. That the Complainant has complied with all the requirements of Section 138 of th e 
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 as amended upto-date namely the cheque in question were 
presented on ______ i.e. within the period of its validity, the demand for payment was  made 
to the Accused on ………. i.e. within thirty  days of the date or receipt of information 
regarding the dishonouring of the cheque. True copy of the said demand dated …….  is 
annexed hereto as Annexure – ‘D’. The postal receipt and the U.P.C. thereof are annexed 
hereto as Annexure-E collectively. The accused failed to make the payment within fift een 
days of the said notice and as such the Complainant has approached this Hon ’ble court within 
one month of the date of the cause of action. The Compaint is therefore within time. 
8. That the Hon ’ble Court has jurisdiction to entertain and try the present complaint because 
the offence is committed within the jurisdiction of this Hon ’ble Court.  (Mention how the 
court has jurisdiction based on the facts). 
 
PRAYER: 
 
It is, therefore most respectfully prayed that his Hon ’ble Court may be pl eased to summon the 
accused under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 as amended upto-date and 
the accused be tried and punished in accordance with law for the aforesaid offence commi tted 
by him.    
 
          COMPLAINANT 
Place                 THROUGH 
Date          ADVOCATE 
 
Note :   List of witnesses to be mentioned at the end of the complaint or separately after 
writing short title of the complaint case –  
1. Complainant; 
2. Banker(s) of the complainant with record of the cheque. 
3. Banker(s) of the accused with record of the cheque 
4. Any other witness, if needed, as per the facts of the case 
* * * * * 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 81    
APPLICATION FOR MAINTENANCE UNDER SECTION 125 OF CRPC, 1973 
 
IN THE COURT OF PRINCIPAL JUDGE, FAMILY COURT, DELHI. 
 
MAINTENANCE APPLICATION NO.  __________   OF    2017 
 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
1.Smt. X _______  
W/o  Z._________  
R/o _________ 
2.Master R  
S/o  Z _________  
R/o __________ 
through his mother and natural guardian Smt X            APPLICANTS 
VERSUS 
Z ____ 
S/o ______ 
R/o _____                                                RESPONDENT             
 
APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 125 OF THE CODE OF 
 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
 
 Most Respectfully Showeth: 
 
1. That the Applicant No. 1 is the legally wedded wife of the Respondent while  
Applicant No. 2 is the legitimate son of the Respondent. 
2. That the Applicant No.1 was married to the Respondent according to the Hindu Ri tes 
and ceremonies on ____________(date) at New Delhi and the Applicant No. 2 was born out 
of their wedlock on __________. The Applicant No. 2 is staying with Applicant No. 1 at 
present. 
3. That Applicant No. 1 and Respondent stayed together after their marriage and for the  
last two years proceeding________, they were staying at Delhi. 
4. That sometime during the period June-July, _______, the matrimonial life of the 
Applicant No. 1 and the Respondent got disturbed on account of the illegitimate aff air of the 
Respondent with a girl named Mrs. A. The Applicant No. 1 made best possible effo rts to 
persuade the Respondent to desist from indulging in an affair outside their wedlock. However, 
the same had no effect on the Respondent. Rather, the behavior of the Respondent toward s 
Applicant No. 1 became rude, cruel and oppressive, and finally on ___________, the 
Respondent compelled the Applicant No. 1 to leave the matrimonial home along with  
Applicant No. 2, since then, the Applicants are staying with Applicant No. 1 ’s father. 
 82    
5. That the Applicant No.1 has made repeated attempts to join the Respondent in t he 
matrimonial home. However, the Respondent has refused to take back the Applicant s and has 
clearly informed Applicant No. 1 that he was planning to marry Mrs. A though the same is 
not permissible under law. As such, the Respondent has deserted th e Applicants without any 
reasonable cause. 
6. That the Respondent is liable to maintain the Applicants who have repeatedly 
requested the Respondent to provide them the appropriate maintenance. However, the 
Respondent has not only refused/neglected to maintain the Applicants, but has also refused to 
ever part with/return the articles belonging to Applicant No. 1 towards the dow ry and 
Stridhan which are lying at the Respondent ’s house. 
7. That the Respondent is a man of status and is working as a Wing Commander in 
Indian Air Force. He is getting monthly emoluments of about Rs. _____ per month and as 
such has sufficient means to maintain himself and the applicants. He has no encumbrances  or 
liabilities except that of maintenance of the applicants. 
8. That the Applicant No. 1 has no independent source of livelihood and as such is 
unable to maintain herself. She is staying with her father at Delhi and as such both the 
Applicants are dependant upon him. 
9. That the Applicant No. 2 is a minor and is also staying with the Applicant No. 1.  He 
is studying in Delhi Public School, New Delhi, and his monthly expenditure inclu ding school 
fees, dresses etc. is more than Rs. ______ Apart form this, the Applicant No. 1 ha s also kept a 
maid to properly look after the Applicant No. 2 and is paying her Rs. ____  per month w hich 
is presently being borne by her father. 
10. That the Applicants are residing at Delhi. This Hon ’ble Court therefore is competent 
to entertain and try this petition.  
PRAYER: 
  It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that the orders for maintenance  of 
the Applicants be passed and against the Respondent directing the Respondent to pay the 
monthly allowance of Rs. ___  towards the maintenance of the Applicant No. 1 and R s 
______ towards the maintenance of the Applicant No. 2. The costs of these proceedings b e 
also awarded to the applicants. 
APPLICANTS 
Place:       THROUGH 
Date:                ADVOCATE 
 
(Note :- An affidavit is to be attached to this petition) 
Note :   List of witnesses to be mentioned at the end of the complaint or separately after 
writing short title of the complaint case.   
  
 
 
 83    
OTHER  PLEADINGS  
COMPLAINT UNDER THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986 
 
BEFORE THE DISTRICT CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL FORUM 
(DISTRICT _____________) 
CONSUMER COMPLAINT NO. _______ OF  2017 
IN THE MATTER OF:- 
D ______  
S/o Shri ________  
R/o ________                       …COMPLAINANT 
VERSUS 
1. District Manager, Telephones  
   ________________________-                                    …OPP. PARTY NO. 1 
2. Sub-Divisional Officer Phones,              …OPP. PARTY NO. 2 
     
COMPLAINT UNDER SECTION 12 OF THE CONSUM ER  
PROTECTION ACT, 1986 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
 1. That the Complainant is a subscriber of telephone no. ____ prior to _____ number 
whereof was ______. 
 2. That the Complainant telephone went out of order on ______. Several complaints 
were lodged with the department concerned which did not yield any result. 
 3. That a written complaint was lodged by him in the office of the opposite party No. 1 
on _____ and also on ______ He then approached personally to the Sub-Divisional Off icer 
Phones _____and filed a written complaint with him on _____. On ____ his telephone line 
was made operational. 
 4. That on ________, the communication system installed at the residence of the 
complainant was again found paralysed. The matter was again reported to the depart ment. 
Authorities did not take any action. He then lodged a written complaint in t he office of the 
opposite party No. 2 on _______. It did not find any response from the opposite parties. 
Another written complaint was lodged in the office of the opposite party No. 2 on ______. It 
also remained unattended. Complainant then moved to the opposite party No. 1 and presented 
before him a written complaint on _______ whereafter the telephone service of t he 
complainant was revived on the same day after continuous 24 days fault in the line. 
 5. That the complainant paid his telephone bill dated ______ amounting to Rs. _____ 
on _____ vide receipt No. ____ . On ______ he was asked by the Opposite Party  to pay bill 
dated _____ by _______ failing which telephone connection was liable to be disconnected by 
5 p.m. same day. The complainant never received bill dated ________ till date in original . He 
approached the opposite party for a duplicate bill dated _____ when he was told by him that 
 84    
another bill dated ______ be paid on the same day itself without which the payment of bill 
dated _____ would not be accepted. Request of the complainant to trace and produce receipt 
of payment of bill dated _____ was turned down by the opposite parties and the complainant 
was forced to pay both the bills on ______ although the bill dated _____ stood paid vide 
receipt No. _____ dated ________. 
 6. That bill dated ______ charged Rs. _____ on account of rent from _____ to ____ . 
Bill dated ______ charged for rent from _____ to ______. Thus applicant has been charged 
rent for the month of July ____ twice. 
 7. That on account of dereliction of duty and negligence on part of the opposite p arties 
No. 1 and 2 the complainant suffered loss and injury due to deprivation, harassment, ment al 
agony and loss of professional practice and for which he is entitled to compensation and 
refund of excess amount charged by the department. 
 8. That the complainant sent a notice to each of the opposite parties by registe red post 
asking them to pay him a sum of Rs. _____which now stands to Rs. _____ along with interest 
thereon till date of the actual payment to which none of them responded. 
 9.  That in the interest of justice the complainant should be paid by the depar tment 
through the opposite parties as under: 
(1) Compensation of Rs . ____ @ per day for 69 days during which the 
telecommunication system remained paralysed, for the loss and injury caused to the 
complainant due to negligence and derelication of duly on the part of the opposite parties. 
(2)  Payment of Rs. ______ as stated in para 5 hereto along with interest @12% p.a. 
till the date of actual payment. 
(3)  Payment of Rs. ______ as refund of rental for 69 days as stated in paras 2,3 and 
4 thereof. 
(4)  Payment of a sum of Rs. _____  being amount of rent for the month of July 
charged by the opposite parties  twice as stated in Para. 6 hereto. 
(5)  Payment of a sum of Rs. _____ towards cost of notices including charges for 
stationary postage etc., given tyo the opposite parties. 
 10. That in support of the above averments and claims documents have been enclosed 
alongwith this complaint. 
 11. That the cause of action arose on ______  when the telephone of the complainant 
went out of the order and the system remained disputed for long 60 days merely due to t he 
dereliction of duty and negligence of the opposite parties. 
 12. That for the purposes of Section 11 of the Act compensation claimed by the 
complainant is below Rs. _______ so this Forum has jurisdiction to determine and adjudicate  
upon this consumer dispute. 
 13. That there is a duty cast upon the District Manager Telephones, the opposi te party 
No. 1 and the officials working under him to maintain trouble free service of the 
communication system installed at the premises of the complainant and to which they have 
miserable failed which has put the complainant to great deal of inconvenience, expense and  
mental agony. 
 85    
 14. That in the interest of justice the claims of compensation and refund should be 
allowed and also the interest as stated here before 
PRAYER:  
 It is therefore, most respectfully prayed that this petition be kindly allowed, an amount 
of Rs______and interest wherever due be declared payable to the complainant by the 
opposite parties and the Opposite parties be directed to pay the amount as aforesaid to the 
complainant within 30 days of the Hon ’ble Forum 
Complainant 
Date:                                                                                                         Through 
Place : Advocate 
Note  : An affidavit in suport to be annexed 
 
As and when the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 is enforced, the pleading in terms of 
jurisdiction and other facets should be modified. 
* * * * * 
 
  
 86    
CONTEMPT PETITION 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI 
CONTEMPT PETITION NO. _________ OF     2017 
IN 
CIVIL WRIT NO. ______  OF ________ 2003 
IN THE MATTER OF : 
1.   X ___________ S/o _________________ 
      R/o ______________________________, New Delhi 
2. Y ___________ W/o ________________ 
       R/o  _____________________________, New Delhi                    …PETITIONERS  
Versus  
1.   Union of India through its Standing Counsel Delhi High Court, New Delhi. 
2.   Land & Acquisition Collector Delhi Administration, Delhi. 
3. Delhi Development Authority, through its Vice Chairman, New Delhi 
4. Shri ____________, Asstt. Director Task Force, DD A, New Delhi  … RESPONDENTS 
CONTEMPT PETITION UNDER SECTIONS 11, 12 OF THE CONTEMPT OF 
COURTS ACT, 1971 
MOST RESPECTFULLY SHOWETH: 
1. That the President Residents Welfare Association, _____ New Delhi filed C ivil writ 
Petition No. 2420/2003 in the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi. The respondents in the said  
petition were the Union of India, Land Acquisition Collector and the DDA. The said petit ion 
is still pending and awaiting final disposal. 
2. That the Hon ’ble court on 1.10.2003 issued notice to the respondents and granted status 
quo thereby restraining the respondents including D.D.A. from demolishing the construction  
raised in the impugned area. The said area included plot No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 21, 22, 35 and 36 
belonging to petitioners named above. The above plot were in Khasra No. 78/21/2. The copy 
of the orders for grant of status quo are annexed herein as Annexures A-1, A-2, A-3, After the 
issue of Rule on 10.1.2005 (the said order is Annexure A-2) the petition has not come up for 
hearing. 
3. That the petitioners herein the contempt petition have also annexed the site plan. T he same 
is Annexure A-4. The Plot area belonging to the petitioners is marked. Red. 
4. The respendent D.D.A. had been conducting demolition in the said area in December/1998  
and January, 1999 and since the petitioners apprehended that their property minght al so be 
demolished and therefore, approached the D.D.A. several times and made them aware of th e 
court orders and specially the orders for grant of status quo. A written represent ation dated 
3.12.98 was also routed through the Residents Welfare Association, Vijay Nagar, Phase-I , 
Delhi to Deputy Director, Land, D.D.A., Delhi.  
 87    
Annex. A-5 : The copy of the same is annexed as Annexure A-5 alongwith its English 
Translation. However, despite making the D.D.A. aware of the above/orders of gr ant of status 
quo in the Writ Petition (Civil) 2420/2003 the D.D.A. officials namely ______ alongwi th 
Shri _______ , came to the site on 4.1.99 at 3.45 P.M. and demolished the construction raised 
on plot No. 1, Block ‘L’, Plot No. 2, Block ’L’, Plot No. 3, Plot No. 4, Plot No. 21, Plot No. 
22, Plot No. 35 and 36 belonging to petitioners. 
1. That as a result of demolition the petitioners have suffered loss al all the p lots had the 
constructions on it. The details of constructions and the damage incurred is given here in 
below : 
2. That it will not be out of place to mention that the respondent D.D.A. had earli er in 
the years 2001 and 2002 demolished the construction in the area for which status quo was 
granted but after the petitioners apprised them of the Court orders they got const ructed the 
building demolished by them at their expense. 
5. That the petitioners herein annex as Annexure A-6, the photo graphs of the place where 
their building situates and have been demolished by the respondent D.D.A. 
6. That as detailed above, the petitioners being the owners of plot in Khasra No. 78/21/ 2 
who had been given status quo orders by the Hon ’ble Court in Civil Writ Petition 2420/2003 
titled Resident Welfare Association v. Union of India and others had every right not to get the 
construction demolished from the D.D.A. The said status quo is still continuing by vir tue of 
order dated 10.1.2003 of Justice _______  and Justice _____. By not complying with the said  
status quo orders of the H on’ble Court, the respondent D.D.A. has committed the contempt of 
court, It is worthwhile to mentiion that the following officers are the Contemner s as they 
were conducting the demolition. They are Shri _____ respondent no.___ , Shri ___respondent 
no._____ and Shri _____, respondent no. ___. 
7. The cause of action in the present petition arose when the respondent D.D.A. and 
specially its officers respondents no. 5, 6, 7, herein were apprised of the status qu o orders in 
Civil Writ Petition 2420/2003 (C.M. No. 3592/2003) and the concerned officers r efused to 
comply with the orders of the court. The cause of action is still continuing as the demolition 
had already been done on 4.1.2003. 
 
PRAYER: 
It is therefore most respectfully prayed that the Hon ’ble Court may b e pleased to initiate 
contempt proceedings against the above named contemners. It is further prayed that the 
Hon’ble Court may be pleased to pass such further orders/directions as it may deem fit and 
proper. 
 
 Petitioner 
Date:         Through  
Place:          Advocate 
[Note:  The petition must be supported by an affidavit]. 
***** 
 
 88    
COMPLAINT UNDER OF THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC 
VIOLENCE ACT, 2005 
 
IN THE COURT OF CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE / CHIEF METROPOLITAN 
MAGISTRATE  
COMPLAINT NO. …….OF 2017  
U/S 12 0F DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT  
                                                                                              
IN THE MATTER OF :- 
Smt. X  
W/o Late Sh. Y                                                                                                           
R/o………..        …Complainant  
Versus 
Sh. Z  
S/o 
R/o        …Respondent    
           
        Police Station:  
 
COMPLAINT  UNDER SECTION 12 OF THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM 
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005 
Most Respectfully Showeth:  
 
1. That the Respondent is the father- in- law of the Complainant  who is harassing and 
torturing the Petitioner by illegal act of violence in order to throw her out of  the matrimonial 
home. 
2. That the Petitioner was married to Late Sh. Y on …..as per Hindu rites and 
ceremonies and thereafter started living in the matrimonial home as a joint fami ly along with 
the Respondent and that out of the wedlock following two children were born who are in the 
care and custody of the complainant. The husband of the complainant died on …..due to 
illness  
S.No. Name of 
Children Relation  Age  Status 
1 Master A  Son  8 Studying in 
class IV 
2 Baby B Daughter 5 Studying in 
class I 
 
3. That before his death Sh. Y engaged in the manufacturing and trading of Auto par ts 
and was having factory at rented accommodation at …….and was running as sole proprie tor 
by the name and style of M/s….. and was also running a shop on ground floor.  
 89    
4. That after the death of the husband of the Complainant on …the Respondent has 
misappropriated the machines, tools raw materials etc. lying in the factory of  the husband of 
the complainant and has also trespassed into the shop, belonging to husband of the 
complainant. 
5. That the shop of the husband and Complainant has been taken over by the 
Respondent who doesn ’t allow the complainant to enter the same and to run the same. 
6. That the Respondent is economically harassing the complainant as he has taken over 
the shop and doesn ’t pay any amount to the complainant who has no money and has no 
earnings at all and is dependent upon the shop of her husband for maintenance  
7. That not only this, the Respondent maltreats the complainant in one way or the othe r 
and abuses her in filthy language and want her to vacate the second floor of the pr operty so 
that they may trespass in to the same.  
8. That the Respondent threatens the Complainant with the dire consequences on not  
vacating the second floor of the property. 
9. That hence Complainant is left with no other alternative but to file the in stant 
complaint under Section 12 of Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act as 
complainant. 
10. That the complainant has domestic relationship with the Respondent as Respondent 
was living with the complainant before the death of her husband. 
11. That the deeds and misdeeds of the Respondent are affecting the health and safety of 
the complainant as well as her two children as after the death of her, the Respondent wants the 
children to stop going to the school and be sent to an orphanage. 
12. That the complaint under Section 12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic 
Violence Act, 2005  is being filed as such by the aggrieved person.  
13.  That it is prayed that the Hon ’ble court may take cognizance of the complaint and 
pass all/ any of the orders, as deemed necessary in the circumstances of the case.  
14. Orders prayed for are:  
I. Protection Order under Section 18 directing Respondent to stay away from 
Complainant and not to interfere in her possession of the ground floor, second floor of the 
property in any manner whatsoever 
II. Residence Order under Section 19 directing the Respondent to restrain from 
dispossessing the Complainant from the second and the third floor of property no. …. (  
specifically shown in red in site plan enclosed) and to restraint from i nterfering in the 
possession of the Complainant on the ground floor of the property including the shop in 
property no.  
III. Monetary Relief under Section 20 directing the Respondent to pay the following 
expenses as monetary relief 
a. Food, clothes, medications and other basic necessities- Rs 15000 p.m. 
b. School fees and related expenses – Rs 10000 p.m. amounting to total of Rs 25,000 
p.m.  
IV. Compensation under Section 22 for causing mental agony and physical suffering by 
the complainant as deemed fit by this Hon ’ble Court. 
 
 90    
PRAYER  
It is, therefore, most respectfully, prayed that this Hon ’ble Court be pleased to grant the 
relief(s) claimed herein and pass such orders as this Hon ’ble Court may deem fit and proper 
under the given facts and circumstances of the case for protecting the Complainant from 
domestic violence. 
                                                                                                                                            
         Complainant  
                                                                                                          Through  
                                                                                                                        Advocate 
VERIFICATION  
Verified at Delhi on this day of …….that the contents of the paras 1 to …. of the ab ove 
complaint are true and correct to my knowledge and nothing material has been concea led 
there from . 
                                                                                                               Complainant 
 
 To be accompanied by an affidavit  
* * * * * 
 
  
 91    
 PART B: CONVEYANCE 
 
Definition of Conveyancing  
 
The art of ‘conveyancing ’ is of English origin. The word ‘to convey ’ means to transfer or to 
make over. The word conveyancing means an instrument or deed through which one or more 
living person transfer his or their interest in present or in future i n or upon an inmmovable 
property to one or more living persons. In other words conveyance means an act by which 
property is conveyed or voluntarily transferred from one person to another by means of a  
written instrument and other formalities. Section 2(10) of the Indian Stamp Act , 1899 defines 
the term ‘conveyance ’ as: 
 
“Conveyance includes a conveyance on sale and every instrument by which property, whether 
movable or immovable, is transferred inter vivos and which is not otherwise spe cifically 
provided for by Schedule I. ” 
 
History of Conveyancing  
 
In ancient times, in England the deed writing was optional and it continued to remain optional 
until the time of King Charles II, particularly the case in which the dee d was required not to 
be under seal. Writing was required only in the matter of importance. It was only during the 
reign of King Charles II that the British Parliament enacted in 1677 a legislation requiring 
writing for creation and transfer of the interest in landed property with an exception in case of 
lease for less than three year. The Real Property Act of 1845 required a ll grants of landed 
interest to be made in writing which came to be known as ‘conveyancing ’. The present form 
of conveyancing is based on the Conveyance of Land Act of 1845 and the Law of Property 
Act of 1925. 
 
Conveyancing in India is not unknown as the word, ‘Qabuliyatnama ’, ‘Jagirdar ’, ‘Muafidar ’ 
and ‘Charpatra ’, etc., are there from ancient days in the Indian literatures. As in England and 
so in India, too, there are two types of Deeds, viz., ‘Deed Poll ’ and ‘Indenture ’. Charpatra  
(Redemption of rent), Jagir grants, Quabuliyats , etc, were all the seal of the grantor. The 
Deed Poll is a document which is executed unilaterally in the first person whi le an indenture 
is bilateral or multilateral deed. Bonds, Power of Attorney and Wills are ‘Deed Polls ’. 
Mortgages, sales and gifts can also be unilateral and so these are 'Deed Polls', while a deed of 
Lease is a bilateral document to be executed by the Lessor and Lessee both and so it is an 
‘Indenture ’. No legislation in India has ever been passed on the law of conveyancing.  
 
The Position of Drafting in India  
 
The condition of drafting of conveyancing in mofussil India was deplorable. It was only in the 
then Presidency Towns (metropolitan cities) of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras the work of 
drafting of the  conveyancing remained in the hand of solicitors and barristers w ell trained in 
the field of drafting on the lines of English  conveyancing. But in the Mofussil To wns the task 
 92    
of drafting of  conveyancing remained in the hands of ‘deed writers ’, ‘scribes ’ or ‘scribers ’ 
who have no legal knowledge but have adopted the profession of deed writing. So, the deeds 
in Mofussils generally and commonly suffer from so many defects and sometimes these  
defects become incurable.  
 
Deed  
 
In a broad sense the ‘deed ’ means something done or performed which is synonymous with 
‘act’. In legal sense, deed means a solemn act denoting document, and it may be defined as an 
instrument written on parchment or on a paper executed, signed, sealed and delivered by t he 
executant. A document or an instrument through which a present or future interest  in an 
immovable property is transferred by one or more living persons to another liv ing person or 
persons is called deed. It is called a deed because it is considered the most solemn and 
authentic act that a person can possibly perform in relation to his property. Statem ents made 
in deeds may amount to admission and may operate as estoppel in certain circumstances. 
 
In Halsbury's Law of England, a deed has been defined as an instrument written on parchment 
or paper expressing the intention of some persons named therein who make assurance of some 
interest in property, or of some legal or equitable right, title or clai m, or undertake or enter 
into some obligation, duty or agreement enforceable at law or in equity, or to do some other 
act affecting the legal relation or position of a party to the instrument. 
 
Historically, in England, deeds were classidfied into (a) Deed Poll, and (b) indenture deed.  
 
Deed Poll  
 
As the old practice in England was to indent or cut a document which indicated towa rds 
executant of the deed; and when deed was polled or cut at the top or at the bottom it was 
known as ‘Deed Poll ’. It was called Deed Poll or single deed because it was executed by one 
party only. A bond, a power of attorney, and a will are the best examples of Deed Poll. It is an 
executed contract of  conveyance made by the grantor alone.  
 
Indenture Deed  
 
Under the old practice of drafting of deed in England, the mark of cut or inde nt indicated 
towards the executant of the deed. A deed is technically called an ‘indenture ’ or ‘deed 
indented ’, because the old-practice in England was to cut or intend for the purpose of tally. 
The old practice was to write two copies of the deed upon the same piece of parchment or 
substance with some words or terms or letter of alphabet were so written that  when one copy 
was separated from the other, the substance or the parchment was so cut or indented so as to 
leave half of the word or letter in one copy and the other half in another copy, so as to fit or 
aptly join its counterpart from which it was supposed to have been cut, indented or separa ted. 
This practice of indenting of deeds is no more in England and at present indenture means a 
deed between two or more parties importing the meaning of executed contract of conv eyance 
 93    
made under seal. A deed of Lease, a mortgage deed and a partnership deed were the best 
example of indenture deed according to old practice in England.  
 
Distinguish between Deed Poll and Indenture Deed 
 
1. Deed Poll and Indenture both are executed contract and are always in writing. 
2. Both are deeds of conveyance and used as documentary evidence if needed. 
3. Deed Poll or single deed is a unilateral document executed by one party only, whil e 
Indenture deed is bilateral or multilateral document executed by two or more than two parties. 
4. A Deed Poll is generally written in the first person while an Indenture deed is always 
written in the third person. In other words, in a Deed Poll, the grants and the covenants of the 
grantor are in the first person, while in an Indenture, grant and covenants are in the t hird 
person. 
5. A Deed Poll may be commenced with the expression, ‘Know All Men By These 
Presents ’ or ‘To whomsoever it May Concern ’ or straightway ‘I, so and so, Send These 
Presents ’, while in an Indenture deed, the opening words are – ‘This Indenture of.......... ’ or 
‘This Deed of......... ’ or ‘This Instrument of......... ’ etc. 
6. Historically, in England, the difference between a Deed Poll and an Indenture deed 
was an interesting one, but at present there is no such difference and both are indiscriminatel y 
used for each other. The difference is only for phraseology but of no practical importance. 
7. The old concept of difference between the Deed Poll and an Indenture as, historical ly, 
was maintained in England had never found place in India. It is because an indenture rel ating 
to real property in England was required to be made under seal which never was a 
requirement in India. 
Document 
 
Documents means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, 
figures, or marks, or by more than one of those means intended to be used, or which may be 
used, for the purpose of recording that matter ( sec. 3, Indian Evidence Act 1872) . 
Documentary evidence is an important piece of evidence of which the Court, Jury and 
Tribunal take judicial cognizance.  
 
 
 
 
Deed, Conveyance and Deed of Conveyance  
 
 94    
The term ‘Deed ’, ‘Conveyance ’ and ‘Deed of Conveyance ’  or ‘Conveyancing ’ are frequently 
used interchangeably to denote one and the same legal concept, and each is being commonly 
understood to mean an instrument in writing whereby the grantor conveys to the grantee some 
right, title or interest in or upon some real property . Thus, by the aforesai d expressions, we 
mean each of them as document, indenture or instrument in writing. So , the terms, 
‘conveyance ’, ‘conveyancing ’, ‘deed of conveyance ’ or ‘conveyancing ’, ‘deed ’, ‘document ’, 
‘indenture ’ and ‘instrument ’ are interchangeable for the purpose of drafting of documents. 
 
Object and Function of Conveyancing 
 
Movable property may be physically given and taken by actual delivery, while this i s not 
possible in case of immovable property. Thus, conveyancing is that branch of the law of  
transfer of property which deals with the mode and form of transfer to which both-  the 
transferor and the transferee have agreed upon. Its main object is to enable the owners o f real 
property to make voluntary transfers of their right, title and interest ther ein for some specific 
purpose and for a specified period. Such transfers are not otherwise possible than by 
conveyancing.  
 
It expresses the intention of the parties to the deed of conveyance so that acco rdingly it shall 
take effect. In case of any doubt, dispute, ambiguity and susceptibility, the real intention of 
the parties may be discovered from the words, phrases and the expression used in the deed. A 
transferor may have passed the property intending to pass; but if he has not expr essed himself 
in suitable words of the language, the deed may be defective or susceptible of two or  more 
constructions; and so the benefits of the transfer may be lost to the transferee. Wher e any 
adverse claimant interposes before the transferee, may get actual legal possession of the 
transferred property, it may be quite possible that the transferor with all h is willingness may 
not be able to help the transferee. 
 
It helps the court and judicial tribunals to determine any dispute if subsequent ly arises 
between the parties to the deed. It serves the purpose of both- the transferor and the transferee 
in protecting their interests. It protects the interest of the transferee from any precedent  and /or 
subsequent acts or omissions of the transferor or any other person claiming throug h or under 
him against the expressed intention of the grant and the covenant of the deed; and li kewise, 
the interest of the transferor is also protected from any subsequent acts or omissio ns of the 
transferee. It is a document of title to the property and forms the basi s of a record of rights 
maintained by the Government. It is, also, a documentary piece of evidence. 
COMPONENTS OF DEEDS 
 
Drafting of a deed involves the law by which parties are governed, effect of the tr ansaction 
and certainty and clarity by using appropriate words and expressions. An ordinary deed o f 
transfer may conveniently be divided into the following parts: Description of t he deed; Date; 
Parties; Recitals; Testatum; Consideration; Receipt; Operative words; Pa rcels; Exception and 
Reservations (if any); Habendum; Covenants (if any); Testimonium. The part of t he deed 
 95    
which precedes the habendum is termed as “the premises ”. Each of these parts will now be 
separately considered. 
A) DESCRIPTION/NAME/TITLE OF THE DEED 
All deeds should be described by the name of the transaction such as “THIS DEED OF 
MORTGAGE ”, THIS DEED OF SALE ”, THIS LEASE ”, THIS DEED OF GIFT ”, etc. When 
the deed is of a complex character and evidences different transactions known by diff erent 
legal names, or the conveyancer is not sure what name should properly be given to it, it would 
be best to describe it simply as “THIS DEED ”. The description is usually written in capitals.  
B) DATE AND PLACE 
After the description of the deed is stated, the date on which it is executed shall be stat ed: 
“THIS LEASE made on the first day of February one thousand nine hundred and 
ninety nine. ” 
The date of a deed is the date on which it is singed by the party or parties execut ing it. When 
there is only one party to a deed, as in the case of Deed Poll, or when all the parties  sign it on 
one and the same date, or when, though there are several parties to a deed, all do not sig n and 
those who sign do so on one date, there is no difficulty. But if several parties to a deed sign it 
on different dates, the question is which date should be entered as the date of deed. The  
practice is to regard the last of such dates as the date of the deed. 
The date should, in order to avoid mistake and risk of forgery, be written in words and not  in 
figures. Figures may be added within parenthesis. 
In every case in which a deed is executed by more than one person, the date on which each  
signs the deed must be shown in the deed, preferably against his signature. 
The place where the deed is executed must be specified very clearly and generally at t he start 
of the document. 
C) PARTIES TO THE DE ED 
1. Transferee 
 
After the date, the names and description of the parties to the deed are mentioned. Who are 
the necessary and proper parties to a deed depends on the circumstances of each case. 
Although a transferee is not a necessary party, and a deed will not be invalid or ineffective if 
he is not mentioned as such, except in the case of a Lease, he is certainly a p roper party. It is 
always advisable to make him a party. 
2. Third person 
Sometimes it is necessary or expedient, in order to validate a transfer or t o give a complete 
title to the transferee, or to avoid possible disputes or doubts in that regard,  to obtain the 
consent or concurrence of a third person. In such cases, such third person may also be joined  
as parties. 
3. Description 
 96    
Full description of the parties so as to prevent difficulty of identificati on should follow the 
name. In India, parentage, occupation and residence including Municipal or survey number, 
street and city and in the case of resident of a rural area the village, sub -division, tehsil and/or 
development block are generally regarded as sufficient to identify a man, but if there is any 
other description which is sufficient, the same may be normally adopted. Where the transfer or 
is as member of a scheduled caste or scheduled tribe for whose protection the statute places 
restrictions on his right to transfer it may be necessary to mention such cast e or tribe while 
reciting the fact of permission for the transfer having been obtained from the competent 
authority. 
4. Juridical Person 
A party to a transfer need not be a living individual but may be a company, or associat ion or 
body of individuals or an idol or a corporation sole or aggregate, or in fact, any juridical 
person capable of holding property and entering into contracts. 
5. Idol 
As an idol has to act through some natural person, the name of the latter should be disclosed. 
6. Reference Labels of Parties 
In  order to avoid the repetition of the full name and description at every place, the parties are 
generally referred to in the body of the deed by some easy and convenient names which 
generally have reference to the character in which they join the deed, such as  ‘the vendor ’, 
‘the purchaser ’, ‘the lessor ’, ‘the lessee ’, In order to avoid mistakes in writing words 
resembling each other for opposite parties, e.g., a combination of ‘mortgagor ’ and 
‘mortgagee ’ or ‘vendor ’ and ‘vendee ’, they prefer to use a combination of ‘borrower ’ and 
‘mortgagee ’, or ‘vendor ’ and ‘purchaser ’. If no such name is adopted, the parties can be 
referred to as ‘the party of the first part ’ (or ‘the first party ’), ‘the party of the second part ’ (or 
‘the second party ’), ‘the said AB ’, ‘the said CD ’, but is is always preferable to give each party 
some short name for reference. Whatever short name is adopted the party should be refe rred 
to throughout by the same name. 
The form, in which the parties will be described in the beginning of the deed, would thus be 
as follows: 
 “This SALE DEED is made on the_______day of _______BETWEEN AB (hereinafter 
called ‘the Vendor ’) of the one part and CD (hereinafter called ‘the Purchaser ’), of the other 
part.” 
If the transferor along is made a party, this clause will run as follows: 
 “The SALE DEED is made on the _______day of________by AB (hereinafter called 
‘the Vendor ’)”. 
If there are more than two parties, instead of the works “of the one part ” and “of the other 
part” the works “ of the first part ”, “of the second part ”, “of the third part ”, etc., should be 
used. 
D) RECITALS 
 97    
Recitals are of two kinds: (1) Narrative Recitals, relates to the past  history of the property 
transferred and set out facts and instruments necessary to show the title and  the relation of the 
parties to the subject-matter of the deed; and (2) Introductory Recitals, which explain the 
motive for the preparation and execution of the deed. 
Form of Recitals 
Recitals generally begin with the word ‘WHEREAS ’, but, when there are several recitals, one 
can either repeat the word before every one of them, by beginning the second and subsequent  
ones with the words ‘AND WHEREAS ’, or divide the recitals into numbered paragraphs with 
the word ‘WHEREAS ’ at the top. 
E) Testatum 
The next part of a deed consists of the operative part. It commences with a witnessing clause 
termed the ‘testatum ’, which refers to the introductory recitals of the agreement (if any) and 
also states the consideration (if any) and recites acknowledgement of its receipt. Th e 
witnessing clause usually begins with the words ‘NOW THIS DEED WITNESSES ’. These 
words of testatum are of no importance as affecting the operation of the deed and their sole 
use is to direct attention to the object which the deed is intended to ser ve several objects, use 
the words ‘as follows ’ after the testatum, thus: 
‘NOW THIS DEED WITNESSES AS FOLLOWS: ’ 
F) CONSIDERATION 
As contracts are necessarily for consideration (Sec. 10 of the Contract Act), it is advisable to 
express the consideration. This is necessary in many cases of transfer for asc ertaining the 
stamp duty payable on the deed as Sec. 27 of the Indian Stamp Act requires that the 
consideration should be fully and truly set forth in the deed. The penalty for om ission to 
comply with this requirements is a fine which may extend to RS. 5,000 (vide Sec. 64). 
G) RECEIPT 
Acknowledgment of receipt of consideration may be embodied in the deed itself instead of  
passing a separate receipt. Thus: 
“NOW THIS DEED WITNESSES THAT in pursuance of the aforesaid agreement and i n 
consideration of Rs.________paid by the purchases to the vendor before the execution hereof, 
the receipt of which the vendor hereby acknowledges ”. 
H) OPERATIVE WORDS 
Then follow the real operative words which vary according to the nature of the estate and of 
the transaction.  
 
I) PARCELS  
 
 98    
This is a technical expression meaning description of the property transferred an d it follows 
the operative words. Care must be taken, on the one hand, to include in the particular 
description or in general words, all the lands, etc., which are intended to pass so that no doubt 
may arise as to the extent and operation of the deed; and on the other hand no t insert words 
which will pass more than what is intended. 
Map:  Sometimes it is necessary to have a map or a plan of the property in order to av oid 
mistake about its identity and to indicate the actual property conveyed with g reater 
definiteness and precision. A map referred to in a transfer deed is treated as incorporated in 
the deed, and if it is drawn to scale and demarcates the boundaries clearly it is not permissible 
to attempt to correct them with reference to revenue records. 
Great care should be taken in describing the property, as a slight mistake or omission may 
cause immense loss to a party and if the property is described both in the body and the 
schedule, a conflict between the two should be carefully avoided. 
J) EXCEPTIONS AND RESERVATIONS 
All exceptions and reservations out of the property transferred should follow the parcel s. 
An exception is something in existence at the date of transfer which, if not expr essly 
excepted, would pass with the property as described in the parcels, such as trees. 
A reservations is something not in existence at the date of the transfer but is newly created by 
the grant, e.g. when the vendor reserves a right of way over the property. But since bot h 
‘excepting and reserving ’ are used in practice it is immaterial whether what follows is an 
exception or a reservation. 
K) HABENDUM 
This is familiar ‘to have and to hold ’ (in Latin, habendum et tenendum ) clause of the English 
precedents. In India such phrases as ‘to have and hold ’ or such expressions as ‘to the use of 
the purchaser ’ are not strictly necessary. 
L) CONVENANTS AND UN DERTA KINGS 
If the parties to a transfer enter into covenants, such covenants should be entered af ter the 
Habendum. While drafting covenants, regard should be had to the statutorily implied  
covenants which operate subject to any contract to the contrary. Where several covenants 
follow each other, they may run on as one sentence, each being introduced with th e words 
‘and also ’ or by the words ‘First’, ‘Secondly ’, etc. or they may be set out in paragraph form 
with the heading. 
‘THE VENDOR HEREBY COVENANTS WITH THE PURCHASER AS FOLLOWS: ’ 
 
It is better to put in the transferor ’s and the transferee ’s covenants separately, and any 
covenants mutually entered into by the parties with each other may be inserted  separately. If 
the transferer ’s and transferee ’s covenants are separately mentioned in the deed, care should 
be taken that no covenant which should really by the covenant of one party is entered in the 
covenants of the other. For example, if a lessee is given the right to cut trees of a certain kind 
and not to cut tree of a different kind, the latter covenant is a covenant by the lessee and the 
 99    
former is a covenant by the lessor and both should not be inserted in one coven ant by either. 
When it is found inconvenient or awkward to split up, what really is one covenant into two 
parts, it is better to insert such a covenant as a mutual covenant by the parties. 
Sometimes the terms and conditions of a transfer cannot be conveniently separa ted into 
transferor ’s covenants and transferee ’s covenants. In such cases, it would be better to include 
all the covenants under one head as parties ’ covenants thus:  
 
‘THE PARTIES HEREBY MUTUALLY AGREE WITH EACH OTHER AS FOLLOWS: ’ 
M) TESTIMONIUM 
The last part of a deed is the testimonium which sets forth the fact of the parties having signed 
the deed. This is not an essential part of the deed, but as it marks the close of the deed there is 
no harm in continuing the established practice. The usual English form of testim onum is as 
follows: 
‘In witness whereof the parties hereto have hereunto set their respective hands and seal s the 
day and year first above written. ’ 
The use of seals is not common in India except in cases of companies and corporations, an d 
the proper form in simple language would be somewhat as follows: 
‘In witness whereof the parties hereto have signed this deed on the date first above written. ’ 
N) SIGNATURES AND ATTESTATION 
After testimonium should follow the signatures of the executants and those of attest ing 
witnesses. If executant is not competent to contract or is a juristic person, the d eed must be 
signed by the person competent to contract on his or its behalf. 
 
* * * * * 
 
 100  
WILL 
 
Section 2(h) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 defines Will as: 
“Will means the legal declaration of the intention of a testator with respec t to his property 
which he desires to be carried into effect after his death. ” 
 
Section 2(b) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 defines Codicil as: 
“Codicil is an instrument made in relation to a will, and explaining, altering or adding to its 
disposition, and shall be deemed to form part of the will. ” 
 
 There is no standard form prescribed by law regarding drafting a will. 
 The language of the will should be clear and unambiguous. 
 The properties should be described with complete clarity. 
 A will is drafted in first person. 
 Details of the testator to be mentioned clearly. (Name, Age, Occupation, Address 
etc.) 
 Details of bequeath, to whom and which property is given. 
 Details of the executor if any. 
 Previous testaments if any. 
 Sound state of mind of testator. 
 Signature and attestation. Signature of the testator and attesting witnesses(with t heir 
details) 
 No stamp duty is required to be paid on a will. 
 Will is not required to be compulsorily registered, it is optional. 
 
  
 101  
WILL 
 
THIS IS THE LAST WILL TESTAMENT of me, Sh. XYZ S/o Sh. ABC R/O 13, PQS 
APPARTMENTS, ROHINI, DELHI- 110085 made at….(Place) on….(Date).  
That life is uncertain and this is my last Will by way of which I bequeat h voluntarily and out 
of my own free will in a sound state of mind, my self acquired properties to the beneficiaries 
as described hereunder. 
 
WHEREAS I was married to…..(name) on….(date) and is living happily for …. Years  and 
out of the wedlock we have two children, a son …….(name) aged… and a daughter  …… 
aged…..  
AND WHEREAS ….. my son is happily married to….(name) and out of the wedlock, they 
are blessed with one child….. (name) aged…. and are residing at ……(address).  
AND WHEREAS ……my daughter is married to…(name) and out of the wedlock they are  
blessed with one child….(name) aged… and are residing at…(address).  
 
In my lifetime I have built my movable and immovable properties out of my own sources and, 
therefore, I am the absolute owner of the properties hereunder. 
IMMOVABLE PROPERTY 
1. Residential property bearing no. ………….admeasuring …………...  
2. Residential property bearing no……….admeasuring………….  
  (hereinafter called the Immovable Property) 
MOVABLE PROPERTY 
All my household and personal belongings at ………..  
FD’s if any 
Gold Details etc. 
(hereinafter called the Movable Property) 
 
I HEREBY WISH that my abovementioned property should devolve in the following manner: 
That my property bearing no………would devolve on to my wife….absolutely and 
unconditionally and she shall deal with the said property in any manner as she lik es and my 
children will have no claim on this property whatsoever. 
That my property bearing no…… and my all movable property would devolve on to my 
son….. absolutely and unconditionally and none of my legal heirs shall have any claims on 
this property whatsoever. 
That my daughter is happily married and is well settled in her matrimonial home and she does 
not need any financial support for survival after my death.  
That my present will is drafted in my presence and upon my instructions and conten ts of my 
will have been read out to me in my own vernacular.   
I declare the contents of this Will to be my last Will arrived at by me in sound state of mind. 
 
IN WITNESSES WHEREOF I….. have signed this will hereunder on this ….Day of …., 
20...at…in t he presence of the following witnesses who are also attesting this will in m y 
 102  
presence and at my request.        
        Sign 
TESTATOR 
 
Signed by the above named testator in our presence at the same time and each of us has in th e 
presence of the testator signed our name hereunder as an attesting witness 
 
1. Name and details of Witness 1      Sign 
2. Name and details of Witness 2      Sign 
* * * * * 
 
 
  
 103  
POWER OF ATTORNEY 
Power of Attorney is a document of agency or a formal arrangement by which one person 
(Principal) gives another person (Attorney or Agent) authority to act on his behal f and in his 
name. As per the Power of Attorney Act, 1882: 
“Power-of-Attorney includes any instruments empowering a specified person to act for and in 
the name of the person executing it. ” 
A Power of Attorney may be a general or special power. A General Power of A ttorney covers 
more than one subject matter while a Special Power of Attorney relates t o a specific subject 
matter, though it may contain several powers relating to the same subject matter. Power of 
Attorney is required to be stamped but need not be mandatorily registered.  
GENERAL POWER OF ATTORNEY  
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT THIS GENERAL POWER OF 
ATTORNEY is executed at New Delhi on this 1st day of January 2004  by M/s. TINRIN, a 
company incorporated under the Companies Act having its registered office at E- 1 
WESTEND, New Delhi through its Managing Director Mr. X……(details) (hereinafter  
referred to as the EXECUTANT), DO HEREBY APPOINT, NOMINATE, CONSTITU TE 
AND  AUTHORISE Sh. Y….(details), Executive Director of M/s TINRIN (her einafter 
referred to as the ATTORNEY) AS MY TRUE AND LAWFUL ATTORNEY TO 
MANAGE, CONTROL, LOOKAFTER / SUPERVISE, PERFORM ALL LEGAL ACTS 
MENTIONED HEREUNDER. 
WHEREAS…..  
AND WHEREAS…..(Mention few recitals like the purpose of making this GPA). 
NOW THIS GENERAL POWER OF ATTORNEY WITNESSESTH AS UNDER:- 
(i) To institute, commence and conduct any action, suit or other legal proceedings before any 
Court, Arbitrator, Quasi-judicial or authorities, Offices, Tribunal s, Labour Courts, 
Conciliation Officers, Land Acquisition Officers, etc. on behalf of the company for  claiming 
any right, relief, recovery, title, interest, property or in respect of any matter connect ed with or 
arising out of the Company ’s business and subject to aforesaid, to settle, adjust, compromise 
or submit to Arbitration any such actions, suits or proceedings. 
(ii) To defend all actions, suits, proceedings, applications, petitions, appeals, revisions, 
reviews, arbitrations, conciliations, taxation and labour matters and other disputes that  are 
now pending or may hereafter be brought or made or instituted in any Court or offi ce or 
Tribunal, Arbitrator, Conciliation Officer, or any other Judicial or Quasi-judicial a uthorities in 
the name of the company. 
(iii) To appear and represent the Company in any Court of Justice or Tribunal whatsoever and 
for the purpose aforesaid or any of them to sign and verify plaints, written st atements, 
applications and swear affidavits and to sign petitions and other necessary documents 
including Valalatnama and to appoint any Solicitor, Advocate, Pleader or other Legal Adv isor 
 104  
with the necessary power and such again at pleasure, to revoke and appoint others in their 
place. 
(iv) To continue and conduct or defend any appeal, review, revision, arbitration in any Court  
or Tribunal or office against any order, judgment or decree made in suits, acti ons, 
proceedings, application etc. 
(v) Generally for and in the name and as the act and deed of the Company to make, execute 
and do all and every such further and other acts. Deeds, matters and things as shall  be fit, 
requisite and necessary in and about the premises and for all or any of the purposes af oresaid 
and as the Company could do if acting in the premises. 
And I, the said Managing Director of the Company and also for the said Company hereby 
agree to ratify and confirm whatsoever the said Attorney shall lawfully do or cause to be done 
in or about the premises by virtue of these presents. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have hereunto signed this document on the date and place first 
above written in the presence of following witnesses. 
 
                                                                                       
      EXECUTANT 
WITNESSES:   (1)          
                        (2)               
* * * * * 
 
  
 105  
SPECIAL POWER TO ATTORNEY TO EXECUTE A SALE DEED 
 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT THIS SPECIAL POWER OF 
ATTORNEY is executed at New Delhi on this 1st day of January 2004 by I, AB, ……(details) 
(hereinafter referred to as the EXECUTANT), DO HEREBY APPOINT, NOMINAT E, 
CONSTITUTE AND AUTHORISE Sh. Y….(details), (hereinafter referred to as the 
ATTORNEY) AS MY TRUE AND LAWFUL ATTORNEY TO PERFORM ALL LEGAL 
ACTS MENTIONED HEREUNDER. 
WHEREAS…..  
AND WHEREAS…..(Mention few recitals like the purpose of making this SPA). 
NOW THIS SPECIAL POWER OF ATTORNEY WITNESSESTH AS UNDER:- 
1. To receive from the purchaser or his heirs or assigns the sum of Rs……………being the 
price agreed to be paid to me by XY for the purchase of (description of proper ty) under an 
agreement dated the………………and to give an effectual receipt and discharge for the same;  
2. To execute a proper sale deed of the said property or any other deed or assurance necess ary 
for the completion of the sale of such property and to get the same duly registered; 
 
And I hereby agree to ratify and confirm whatsoever the said Attorney shall lawful ly do or 
cause to be done in or about the premises by virtue of these presents. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have hereunto signed this document on the date and place first 
above written in the presence of following witnesses. 
 
                                                                                       
      EXECUTANT 
WITNESSES:   (1)          
                        (2)               
 
* * * * *  
 106  
SALE OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY 
 
Section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 defines Sale as: 
 
“Sale is a transfer of ownership in exchange for a price paid or promised or part-paid or part-
promised. ” 
 
 The contract for sale of immovable property must be in writing.  
 Section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 lays down the duties, obligation and 
rights of the vendor and purchaser under an agreement of sale, as well as for sa le in case of 
absence of contract to the contrary.  
 Sale deed is chargeable with the stamp duty.  
 Where the value of the immovable property is more than Rs. 100, it is required to be 
compulsorily registered.  
 An agreement for sale and sale deed should clearly show: who are the parties to the 
contract (Vendor/Vendee or Vendor/Purchaser or Seller/Buyer); the subject matt er; the 
intention to sell and buy; the price agreed and how it is to be paid and other terms of the 
contract.  
 The contract for sale of immovable property is usually preceded by an agreement f or 
sale 
 
AGREEMENT FOR SALE 
 
THIS AGREEMENT is made at …………on this …………day of……….  
BETWEEN 
Mr. A aged……..s/o……….r/o….. (hereinafter referred to as the VENDOR which expression 
shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof shall mean and include h is heirs, 
executors, administrators and assigns of the FIRST PART). 
AND  
Mr. B aged ……….s/o……….r/o….. (hereinafter referred to as the VENDEE/PURCHASER 
which expression shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof shall mean and  
include his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns of the SECOND PART). 
WHEREAS the Vendor is the absolute owner of the property bearing 
no…….admeasuring….situated at………(hereinafter referred to as the said property).  
AND WHEREAS the Vendor has agreed to sell the said property to the Vendee at the price 
and on the conditions mentioned hereinafter. 
 107  
NOW IT IS AGREED BETWEEN THE PARTIES AS FOLLOWS: 
 
1. The Vendor hereby agrees to sell, transfer and convey the said property in favour  of 
the Vendee. 
2. That the consideration of Rs….is to be paid by the Vendee to the Vendor. Rs…..is to 
be paid at the execution of this agreement as earnest money. Rs….on…..(date) and lastly  
Rs….at the time of final sale deed.  
3. The Vendor acknowledges the payment of Rs….as earnest money paid in 
cash/cheque/dd no…drawn on ……(Bank  name and Branch) by Vendee. 
4. The Vendor shall make out a marketable title of the said property free from 
encumbrances and reasonable doubts. 
5. The Vendor shall deliver to the Vendee the title deeds relating to the said pr operty in 
his possession and power on execution of these presents for inspection and i nvestigation of 
the title by the Vendee or his advocate. 
6. The Vendor agrees to apply for, obtain and furnish unto the Vendee all such 
permissions as may be necessary under the laws for registration of Sale Deed. 
7. The Vendor and the Vendee hereby agree that the sale will be completed within six 
months from the date hereof. 
8. All the taxes, levies etc due and payable against the said property shall be paid by th e 
Vendor till the completion of sale and thereafter it will be the responsibi lity of the purchaser. 
The Vendor shall handover all the tax receipts etc. duly paid to the Vendee at t he time of 
completion of sale. 
9. The Vendor agrees to handover actual, physical and vacant possession of the said 
property unto the Vendee at the time of sale deed. 
10. That the expenses towards the payment of stamp duty, registration charges and al l 
other incidental expenses for agreement for sale and sale deed shall be borne out by the 
Vendee. 
11. If the Vendor fails to make out the clear marketable title to the said pr operty as 
aforesaid then the Vendee will have the right to cancel this agreement by gi ving atleast fifteen 
days notice to the Vendor and after the expiration of fifteen days the agreement shal l stand 
terminated and the Vendor agrees to return the earnest money to the Vendee. 
12. If the Vendee fails to perform his obligations under this agreement within the time 
stipulated then the Vendor shall be entitled to cancel this agreement by giving atleast fifteen 
days notice in writing to the Vendee. On termination the Vendor will be entitled to forfeit the 
earnest money paid by the Vendee. 
 108  
 
SCHEDULE OF PROPERTY 
Details of the property to be mentioned. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF parties hereunto have  signed this document on the date and pla ce 
first above written in the presence of following witnesses. 
           
          VENDOR 
           
          VENDEE 
                                                                                       
       
WITNESSES:   (1)          
            (2)               
* * * * * 
 
  
 109  
SALE DEED 
 
THIS SALE DEED is made at …………on this …………day of……….  
BETWEEN 
Mr…… aged……..s/o……….r/o….. (hereinafter referred to as the VENDOR which 
expression shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning thereof shall mean and include 
his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns of the FIRST PART). 
AND  
Mr……. aged ……….s/o……….r/o….. (hereinafter referred to as the 
VENDEE/PURCHASER which expression shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning 
thereof shall mean and include his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns of the 
SECOND PART). 
WHEREAS  the vendor purchased a freehold residential plot measuring 300 sq. yds. and 
bearing No.170 in ‘M’ Block of the residential colony known as Greater Kailash Part-II, New 
Delhi vide sale deed dated 6.8.85 registered in the office of the Sub-Registrar,  New Delhi as 
document No. 5560 Addl. Book No. I, Vol. No. 5318 at pages 136 to 152 on 6.8.85. 
The aforementioned plot is bounded as under :- 
EAST ... ROAD     N ORTH … PLOT NO.  M-168 
WEST… SERVICE LANE  S OUTH … PLOT NO. M-172 
 
AND  WHEREAS   the Vendor after purchasing the said plot, got the building plan sanctioned 
from the Municipal Corporation of Delhi vide their letter/file No. 400 /B/85 dated 13.12.85. 
Then the Vendor caused construction thereon of residential building on different floor levels. 
 
AND  WHEREAS  the Vendor has agreed to sell and the Vendee has agreed to purchase part 
of Basement (760 Sq. ft. approx), one front Bed Room of the First Floor (wi th attached bath 
room and small balcony) of the said building on ‘as is where is ’ basis for a total consideration 
of Rs. 2,50,000/- (Rupees two lacs and fifty thousand only) on the terms and condit ions set 
forth hereinafter. 
NOW THIS SALE DEED WITNESSES AS FOLLOWS: 
1. That in pursuance of this agreement, the Vendor has already received from the V endee a 
sum of Rs. 2,00,000/0 (Rupees two lacs only) as part sale consideration, the receipt of which 
the Vendor hereby admit and acknowledge.  
2. The balance amount of Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) has been paid by th e 
Vendee to the Vendor by cheque No. 010806 dated 29.9.86 drawn on Central Bank of India, 
Kalkaji, New Delhi-110019. 
 110  
3. That is view of the amount of sale consideration received, the Vendor   hereby grant, 
convey and transfer all his rights, titles and interests as held on the date hereof in the sa id part 
of basement and part of First Floor of the said property together with undivided, indivisible 
and impartible proportionate ownership rights on the land underneath the said building, o n 
the terms and conditions contained herein, provided that common staircase, water tanks and 
other common facilities, fittings etc. shall be used and enjoyed by the Vendee alongwith other 
owners/occupants of the said building. 
4. That the Vendor is free to sell the remaining portion (s) of the said resid ential building to 
any other party/parties with common rights for use of common entrances, common passages, 
staircases, water tanks, common facilities etc. and the Vendee will not ma ke any objection 
thereto. 
5. That the Vendor assures that the sale of the said residential portion/domesti c storage 
space is free from attachment, tenancies gifts, decree, prior sale and religious di sputes and if 
it is proved otherwise at any time and the Vendee suffers any loss due to any of t he 
aforementioned reasons, then the Vendor shall be liable to make good the loss thus suffer ed 
by the Vendee. 
6. That the Vendee has perused the original title deed, sanctioned plans. Sale plans  etc. and 
has fully satisfied herself. 
7. That the Vendee/occupants shall have no right to use or affix or exhibit any displ ay 
boards or any big writing or any sing boards at the external face of the said building. 
8. That all expenses of registration, Corporation tax etc. have been borne and pa id by the 
Vendee. 
9. That charges for maintenance/consumption for common amenities such as lights i n 
staircases etc. and booster and charges for major repairs etc. shall be paid by the owners of all 
the portions proportionately. 
10. That all taxes from the date of the Agreement to sell the said portion shall be borne and 
paid by the Vendee. If assessment of taxes in not made separately for each portion, t hen all 
the owners of the said building shall pay such charges proportionately directly  to the 
authorities concerned and the Vendor shall in no way be responsible for the same. 
11. That the Vendee shall keep the said property in properly repaired and good condit ion and 
shall not do anything or omit to do anything which may endanger or affect the other portions 
of the said building or hinder the proper and reasonable use of such portions by the other  
owners/occupants of the said building. 
12. That the existing use of the said portion of first floor is residential and t hat on Basement 
domestic storage. The Vendee shall neither use the said portion for any illegal,  immoral or 
commercial purpose nor use it so as to cause annoyance or nuisance to the other 
owners/occupants of the said building. Common parts e.g. staircase, passage, driveway etc. 
will in no case be used for keeping/chaining pets/does or any other animal/b ird or storing 
cycles, scooter, motor-cycles etc. 
13. The Vendee has also satisfied herself about the soundness of the title of the Vendor an d 
his power to sell the said portion in the manner stated herein. 
14. While building is under construction, the Vendee shall have the right to make at her own 
discretion any internal alternations (except structural) in the said porti on at her own cost and 
expenses. 
 111  
15. That the Vendee shall not construct anything whatsoever upon or over hanging the sai d 
land or the portion of the said land kept uncovered and unbuilt upon the building (includi ng 
terrace). The Vendee shall not make any alterations involving structural changes in the said 
protion/building. The Vendee shall have no right to use the terrace at the top of the building . 
16. That the Vendee and owners/occupants (alongwith servants/workmen) of all the portion s 
of the said building will have full right for access to booster pump (tubewel l), water meter, 
sewer tank, overhead water tank etc. at all reasonable times only on notice (except in the case 
of emergency) to get their underground and overhead tanks, booster pump etc. 
repaired/cleaned. 
17. That photostat copies of title deeds etc. have been handed over by the Vendor to t he 
Vendee and physical, vacant possession of the said floor/portion has also been taken by the 
Vendee. 
18. That this transaction has taken place at New Delhi. As such Delhi Court shall hav e 
exclusive jurisdiction to entertain any dispute arising out of or in any way touching or 
concerning this deed. 
 
SCHEDULE OF PROPERTY 
Details of the property to be mentioned. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF parties hereunto have  signed this document on the date and place  
first above written in the presence of following witnesses. 
           
          VENDOR 
           
          VENDEE 
                                                                                       
       
WITNESSES:   (1)          
            (2)               
 
 
*  * * * * 
  
 112  
 
LEASE DEED 
 
THIS LEASE DEED is made and executed at Delhi on ………(Date)  
BETWEEN 
Smt. Sudarshan Kaur W/o Sh. Paramjit Singh R/o H. No. M-170, Greater Kailash-II, New 
Delhi hereinafter referred to as the LESSOR, which expression shall unle ss excluded or 
repugnant to the context to be deemed to include legal heirs i.e. Mr. Paramjit Singh, Husband  
of Lessor herein, successors, executors, administrators, representatives and assigns of the 
FIRST PART. 
AND  
M/s. Dave Thomson Associates (India) Pvt. Ltd. having its registered office at Satyug -Villa 
1st Floor,  5, Gurunanak Nagar off Shankarshet Road, Pune through, their Director Mr. H . R. 
Srinivas to enter into these presences hereinafter referred to as the LESSEE  which expression 
unless excuded or repugnant to the context shall include and mean, successors, successors  in 
interest and assigns of the SECOND PART. 
 
WHEREAS the Lessor has represented to the Lessee  that she is the owner/landlady of the 
Basement portion of the construction at M-170, Greater Kailash-II, New Delhi admeasuri ng 
760 Sq. ft. approximate covered area in the said premises and is desirous of letting out the 
same, hereinafter referred to as the demised premises. 
AND WHEREAS the Lessee has offered to take the demised premises on Lease and the  
Lessor has agreed to let out the same on the terms and conditions hareinafter specified. 
 
NOW THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSETH AS UNDER: 
 
1. T
hat the Lessor hereby conveys to the Lessee the basement portion of the said premises 
admeasuring 760 Sq. ft. Approx for a  period of  24 months with effect from 1st Sept. 1993 at 
a monthly, rent of Rs. 4000/- (Rs. Four thousand only) exclusive of Electricity, water cha rges, 
actual bills/ rental charges of Telephone/Fax whenever installed in the demised premises.    
2. T
hat the Lease will be for an initial period of 24 months with effect from …….. The rent will 
be increased by 10% of the rent payable per annum immediately after expiry of ev ery 12 
months. 
3.  
That both, the Lessor and the Lessee have the right to terminate the Lease even bef ore the 
expiry of the Lease period, by giving 3 months written notice.  
 113  
4. T
hat the Lessor shall have the option to renew the Lease for a further period of 2 years at the 
terms and conditions as laid out by the Lessor. 
5. T
hat on the date of execution of this Lease Deed, the Lessee had paid a sum of R s. 36000/- 
(Rs. Thirty Six Thousand only) vide pay order No….dated….drawn on……….as security 
deposit which will be kept by the Lessor for the due performance of the terms and condit ions 
of this Lease, free of interest. On termination of the Lease, the Lessor  shall refund the 
security deposit/unadjusted advance rent, if any. In case the Lessor fails to refund the se curity 
Deposit/balance advance rent, the Lessee shall be entitled to charge interest at the rate of 21% 
per annum from the date of termination of Lease till the date of refund. Aditional ly,  the 
Lessee shall be entitled to hold possession of the property till the refund of  security 
deposit/unadjusted advance rent alongwith interest, if any is made without payment  of 
rent/Lease money. This will be applicable only on production of documentary proof by the  
Lessee to the Lessor that all dues pertiaining to electricity and any other cha rges payable by 
the Lessee have been cleared upto date. 
6. T
he Lessee covenants with Lessor as under :  
i) That the Lessee agrees to pay a monthly rent of Rs. 4000/- (Rs. Four thousand only) 
mentioned above on or before 7th day of every month. 
ii) That the Lessee agree to carry out minor repairs or replacement of broken parts in  
electrical and sanitary installations and glasses himself, but major repairs pe rtaining to the 
structure of the house will have to be done by the Lessor, as and when considered neces sary 
by him. However, the Lessee shall handover the vacant physical possession to the Lessor  on 
termination of this Lease in the same conditions as it has been handed over to him. 
iii) That the Lessee shall give vacant possession of the premises to the Lessor  after the 
expiry of the Lease period. 
iv) That the Lessee shall duly comply with all the rules and regulations of l ocal authorities 
with regard to the use of the premises. 
v) That the Lessee shall pay the electricity charges in accordance with the bill s at rates 
determined by DESU and accordance with bills/demands received from DESU, NDMC 
including meter rents etc. The meter readings on the date of possession will be duly recorded. 
vi) That the demised premises have been let out to the Lessee for authorised use only. 
vii) That the Lessee shall permit the Lessor or his duly authorised agents during  reasonable 
hours in the day time to enter upon the demised premises for inspection of the Lessor ’s 
fixtures and fittings therein, and the premises as may be deemed fit by the Lessor. 
viii) That the Lessee at the expiry of this Lease shall deliver peaceful and vacant possession 
of the demised premises to the Lessor together with the fittings and fixtur es installed in good 
condition as the same are at present, reasonable wear and tear and damage by fire, 
earthquake, civil commotion, act of God excepted including lightening to fitti ngs etc. but 
excluding telephones, fax computers and air conditioners. No fixtures, wood work etc. carried 
 114  
by the Lessee shall be removed/damaged at the time of handing over vacant possession of the 
demised premises. 
ix) That the Lessee shall not make any alteration of permanent nature within the pr emises 
as well as in the open space, without the written consent of the Lessor. 
x) That the Lessee shall keep the premises in good tenantable condition and shall not 
cause any loss/ damage to it, subject to normal wear and tear of the premises. 
xi) The Lessee shall observe and perform at all time during the continuance of the terms 
hereby created all the terms and conditions herein as contained. 
xii) That the Lessee will not park any motor car or any other vehicle in this outer drive way 
of the premises at any time both inside and outside the main gate. 
 
7. That the Lessor hereby covenants with Lessee as follow:- 
i) That the Lessor has good right and full power and absolute authority to Lease  the 
demised premises to the Lessee in manner herein contained. 
ii) That the Lessor shall not interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of the proper ty by the 
Lessee whether directly on indirectly. 
iii) That the Lessor shall observe and perform at all times during the continuance of this 
deed, all the terms and conditions contained in the Lease deed by virtue of whic h the Lessor 
is holding the said premises and shall keep the Lessee indeminified against an y breach or 
consequences thereof. 
iv) That the Lessor shall pay the taxes whether Municipal or otherwise and fai ling to pay 
any such amount when the same shall fall due for payment, the Lessee shall be entitled to pay 
the same on behalf of the Lessor and to deduct the amount so paid from the rent payable by 
the Lessee to the Lessor hereunder. 
v) That the Lessor shall comply with, at his own cost, all requirements and regulations of 
the Municipals or other lawful authority concerning the demised premises to the observed by 
the owner/landlady. 
8. It is hereby mutually agreed and declared by the parties hereto as follows :- 
i) In the event of the demised premises or any part thereof being destroyed or damaged by 
fire, earth quake, flood, war, air raid, civil commotion, riots or any act o f God or irrestible 
force during the period of the Lease, this Lease shall at the option of the Lessee be 
terminated. And in the event of the Lessee being desirous of any part thereof as the case may 
be so as to enable the Lessor to repair the damage or reinstate the same and the rents hereby 
reserved shall remain suspended till the demised premises or any part thereof as th e case may 
be reinstated or restored to its former state and possession if delivered over to the Lessee for 
the remaining part of this Lease, if any. 
ii) That in the event of any dispute or difference arising out of this deed, the matter w ill be 
referred to the Arbitrator to be appointed by consent of both the parties and his dec ision will 
be binding on both the parties. 
 115  
iii) That the parties to the agreement have specifically agreed that considering the location, 
accommodation, and condition of the said property, the Lease rent is fair rent and in 
consonance with the property, market rates. 
iv) That the terms and conditions of this agreement as stated above shall be binding on 
both the parties. 
v) That the Lease shall automatically come to an end on the expiry of the Lease period. 
The peaceful and vacant possession of the demised premises will be deemed to have been 
handed over by the Lessee to the Lessor. 
vi) The cost of preparation of the original Lease and duplicate thereof and stamps and 
registration fee and in connection with the same shall be borne and paid by the Lessee. 
vii) The Lessor shall retain the original of the Lease deed and the Lessee the duplica te 
thereof. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, these presents have been executed by the parties hereto on the 
day, month and year first mentioned herein above in presence of witness: 
LESSOR   
       LESSEE  
Witnesses:            (1)                        (2)                       
 
 
Note: Read Section 105 to Section 111 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.     
* * * * * 
 
                            
  
 116  
MORTAGAGE DEED 
 
THIS DEED OF MORTGAGE is executed at Delhi on this …..day of …….   
BY 
 
Mr. A son of Sh. ____ resident of ____ hereinafter called the MORTGAGOR, which 
expression shall mean and include his heirs, legal representatives, executors, administr ators 
and assigns of the First Part;  
IN FAVOUR OF 
M/s ABC Ltd., a company incorporated under the Companies Act having its registered office  
at ___ hereinafter called the MORTGAGEE, which expression shall mean and include its 
successors. 
WHEREAS the Mortgagor has vide sale-deed dated 5.1.1988 purchased a vacant residential 
plot bearing Municipal No. A-25 situated at Ashok vihar , Delhi   
AND WHEREAS, the Mortgagor wants to construct a residential building on the af oresaid 
vacant plot of land;  
AND WHEREAS the Mortgagor does not have enough financial means to undertake the 
construction of the residential building on the aforesaid plot of land;  
AND WHEREAS the Mortgagee, with whom the Mortgagor is presently employed, has 
agreed to advance a loan of Rs.2,00,000/- ( Rupees Two lakhs only ) to the Mortgagor, and 
which loan shall be utilized by the Mortgagor towards the construction of a resident ial house 
on the above vacant plot of land.  
AND WHEREAS in consideration of the aforesaid amount of Rs. 2,00,000/- borrowed by t he 
Mortgagor from the Mortgagee, the Mortgagor has agreed to execute this Mortgag e deed of 
the vacant plot of land in favour of the Mortgagee.  
 
NOW THIS DEED, THEREFORE WITNESSES AS UNDER:  
 1. The Mortgagor admits and acknowledges that he owes a sum of Rs.2,00,000/- to the 
Mortgagee on the basis of promissory note and receipt dated …..  executed by him in favour of 
the Mortgagee.  
 2. The Mortgagor shall be lible to pay interest on the above stated principal sum  of Rs. 
2,00,000/- @12% per annum form the date of the loan until payment and in this manner the 
total charge of the referred property of the Mortgagor shall be the principa l sum of Rs. 
2,00,000/-  and interest accruing thereupon.  
 3. The Mortgagor will pay to the Mortgagee the said sum of Rs. 2,00,00/- in equa l 
monthly installment of Rs.2000/- per month on or before the ……….  and in the meantime 
interest thereon or on such thereof as shall for the time being remain unpaid, at the r ate of 
12% per annum by half yearly payments on the ……….  and the ………  in each year.  
 117  
 4. That any interest not paid on the due dates shall be treated as principal and add ed to the 
principal sum herby secured and bear interest at the rate and payable on the half yearl y days 
aforesaid.  
 5. In consideration of the aforesaid, the Mortgagor hereby transfer by way of simple 
mortgage to the Mortgagee, a vacant residential plot bearing Municipal No. A-25, Ashok 
Vihar, Delhi.  
 6. By this deed, the Mortgagor also mortgages to the Mortgagee any building and all other 
permanent structures that shall be built on the aforesaid vacant plot by the Mortgagor.  
 7. The Mortgagor hereby covenants with the Mortgagee as follows :  
 (i) That the said premises are free from all encumbrances and the Mortgagor undert akes 
that until the entire principal amount and interest, if any due, is not paid back t o the 
Mortgagee, the Mortgagor shall not create any fresh mortgage, charge, pledge, or in any other  
manner, alienate the corpus or his interest in the aforesaid property to any third person. 
 (ii) If the Mortgagor fails to pay the sum with interest after it has  become payable under 
the provisions of the this deed, the Mortgagee shall, in addition to any other remedy  available 
to him under the law, have the power to sell without the intervention of a Court the mortgaged 
property or any part thereof for the realization of the money due to it hereunder.  
 (iii) During the continuance of the Mortgage, the Mortgagor shall keep any buildi ng or 
permanent structure erected on the aforesaid plot of land insured against damag e by fire in the 
name of the Mortgagor with an Insurance Company and shall punctually pay all premium on 
such insurance and shall produced to the Mortgagee on demand, the policy of such insurance  
and the receipt for the premium so paid.  
 Provided always, that if the Mortgagor shall make default in any of the above matters, t he 
Mortgagee may, in its discretion, insure and keep insured all or any of the said buil ding and 
permanent structures to the amount aforesaid and that the expenses of doing shall be repaid t o 
it by the Mortgagor on demand, and until so paid shall be added to the principal  money 
hereby secured and bear interest accordingly and be secured in the like manner as the s aid 
principal.  
IN WITNESSES WHEREOF the Mortgagor has executed this document on the date, first 
above written.  
MORTGAGOR  
 
MORTGAGEE  
WITNESSES  
 
1. 
2. 
* * * * *  
 
 
 118  
PARTNERSHIP DEED 
THIS DEED OF PARTNERSHIP is executed at New Delhi on this ……day of ……..  
BETWEEN 
Sh. X S/o _____  R/o____, hereinafter called ‘THE FIRST PARTY ’ which expression shall 
mean and include his heirs, successors, executors and legal representatives. 
AND  
Sh. Y S/o Sh. ____ R/o ______, hereinafter called ‘THE SECOND PARTY ’ which 
expression shall mean and include his heirs, successors, executors and legal representatives. 
WHEREAS the First Party is in occupation as a tenant of property measuring 1000 sq. ft. on 
the ground floor bearing No. E-1 Ram Nagar, Delhi. 
AND WHEREAS the First Party is desirous of carrying on the business of interior decoration 
and the Second Party, being experienced in this trade, has approached the First Part y to run 
this business with him jointly in partnership. 
AND WHEREAS the parties have agreed to commence and run the business of interior 
decoration, furnishing, manufacture and sale of furnishing, manufacture and sale of fur niture, 
soft furnishing and accessories in partnership.  
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS DEED WITNESSES AS UNDER: 
1. The name and style of this partnership business shall be M/s XYZ. 
2. The business of this partnership shall be considered to have commenced on ………  
3. That the principal place of business of this partnership shall be at E-1 Ram nagar, Delhi. 
However, the same may be shifted or carried on elsewhere as well with the mutual consent of 
both the parties from time to time. 
4. That the business of the partnership shall be interior decoration, furnishing, manufac ture 
and sale of furniture, soft furnishing and accessories. However, the parties w ill also be 
entitled to extend their activities into business or manufacturing of any other item as well . 
5. The shares of the parties in the profits and losses shall be as follows : 
i) First Party – 51%         ii)           Second Party – 49% 
6. The initial capital has been contributed by both the parties by investing a sum  of Rs. 
15,000/- each.  If and when more funds are required for the business, the partners shall invest 
the same.  However, any capital investment of the partners shall not carry any inter est. In case 
loans or deposits are raised from outside i.e. friends and relations of the partner or th e 
financial institutions then only those loans or deposits, which are taken with the written 
consent of both the partners and are entered in the books of accounts of the partnershi p, shall 
be binding on the firm.   
7. The partnership shall maintain regular books of accounts in accordance with the customs 
of trade and all dealings of the partnership shall be duly recorded in the sam e.  The account 
books etc. shall be maintained in the place of business at . E-1 Ram Nagar, Delhi. 
 119  
8. Each of the partners shall be entitled to withdraw a sum of Rs. 2000/- every month whic h 
shall be adjustable in the final profit and loss account to be prepared every year. 
9. The First Party shall also be entitled to withdraw a sum of Rs. 5000/- per month tow ards 
the rent he is paying to the Landlord in respect of the portion of property no. E-1 Ram Nagar, 
Delhi 
10. The tenancy rights in respect of property no. E-1 Ram Nagar, Delhi shall alway s vest in 
the First Party and whenever the partnership is dissolved for any reason whatsoever, th e 
Second Party shall not be entitled to any right, title or interest in the same. 
11. That the partnership shall maintain proper books of accounts in the normal course of 
business at the principal place of its business and the same shall always be open for inspection 
to the partners. 
12. That the first accounting period of the partnership shall close on 31st March…  and 
thereafter the financial year, shall run from 1st April every year to 31st March of the 
subsequent of the English calendar. 
13. That the bank accounts of the partnership and / or its branches shall be operated under the  
signatures of any of the partners. 
14. That at the close of the accounting period / year, a trial balance, profit and lo ss account 
and balance-sheet etc. shall be prepared and the profit and loss in the ration enumerated a bove 
shall be credited / debited to the capital account of the partners. 
15. That either of the parties would not be entitled to carry on similar or competitive trade 
individually or in partnership and in any other manner. 
16. The partnership shall be at Will.  However, whenever any party intends to diss olve the 
same or retire from the same, he shall give an advance notice of 15 days to the other party and 
during the period of notice, profit and loss account, balance sheets shall be completed to 
finalize the accounts in between as partiers as well as with the outsiders. 
17. That in the event of any dispute arising between the parties with respect to any  clause of 
this document or the working of the partnership or for anything indicated thereo f,  the same 
shall be decided by arbitration in accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration Act and by 
no other process. 
18. That in all other matters not provided herein, the partnership shall be governed  by the 
Indian Partnership Act as applicable from time to time. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have signed this document on the date first above  
written in presence of the following witnesses.       
                                                                                                             FIRST     PARTY  
         SECOND PARTY 
 
WITNESSES  (1)           (2)                       
 
* * * * * 
 
 120  
 
DEED OF DISSOLUTION OF PARTNERSHIP 
THIS DEED OF DISSOLUTION is executed at Delhi on this ……. day of …………  
BETWEEN 
A son of ________ resident of ____________, hereinafter called ‘THE FIRST PARTY ’, 
which expression shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning hereof, mean and include 
his heirs, successors, executors and legal representatives. 
AND  
B son of ________ resident of ____________, hereinafter called ‘THE SECOND PARTY ’, 
which expression shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning hereof, mean and include 
his heirs, successors, executors and legal representatives. 
WHEREAS the parties have been carrying on business in partnership under the name and 
style of ‘M/s ABC ’, from premises bearing No. . E-1 Ram Nagar, Delhi, on the basis of a 
partnership deed executed between them on …………..  
AND WHEREAS it has been mutually decided by the parties hereto to dissolve this 
partnership and to reduce the terms of this dissolution into writing; 
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS DEED WITNESSES AS UNDER: 
 
1. That the partnership constituted by the parties through the p artnership deed dated ……. on 
the basis of which business under the name and style of ‘M/s. ABC ’ was carried at premises 
no. E-1 Ram Nagar, Delhi has been dissolved with effect from today i.e……. . 
2. That all the accounts of the partnership have been agreed and understood by the parties 
and all trading results, profits and losses and personal debit and credit entries a nd balances, 
have been checked and accepted by them as per the account books. 
3. That all records, account books, etc. of the dissolved partnership have been delivered t o 
the First Party hereto, who shall be responsible to notify all concerned authoritie s about the 
fact of this dissolution and shall also be responsible to get the assessments, i f any pending, 
completed. 
4. That the First Party shall  produce the account books of the partnership, whenever 
reasonably required by the Second Party, either before the assessment  authorities  or before 
any other authority. 
5. That the partners shall be liable for their individual taxes.  However, any  taxes or 
payments raise against the dissolved partnership, shall be met by the individual part ies, in 
accordance with his ratio of profits and losses in terms of the partnership deed. 
6. That none of the parties shall be liable for any liability raised by the other i n the name of 
the erstwhile partnership firm. 
 121  
7. Without prejudice to any rights and remedies herein contained, each of the parties heret o 
hereby releases and discharges the other from all actions, proceedings, claims and demands 
on account of the said partnership. 
8. That it is mutually agreed if any dispute arises between the parties in relat ion to present 
Dissolution Deed then the same shall be referred to the Sole Arbitrator to be appoint ed by 
continuing partner under the provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, and pl ace 
of arbitration shall be at New Delhi. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have signed this document on the date first above  
written in presence of the following witnesses.       
                                                                                                             FIRST     PARTY  
         SECOND PARTY 
 
 
WITNESSES  (1)           (2)                       
 
 * * * * * 
       
 122  
RELINQUISHMENT DEED 
 
THIS DEED OF RELINQUISHMENT is executed at Delhi on this 3rd day of July, 1990 
 
BY 
 
1. Smt. Avadh wife of Sh.__________ daughter of late Sh. X, Resident of 
____________ 
 
2. Smt. Bala wife of Sh.__________ daughter of late Sh. X, Resident of ____________ 
3. Smt. Chand wife of Sh.__________ daughter of late Sh. X, Resident of 
____________ 
 
4. Sh. Devi lal Son of late Sh. X, resident of _____ Delhi. 
 
Hereinafter called the RELEASORS which expression shall, unless repugnant to the context 
or meaning hereof, mean and include their heirs, successors, legal representatives and 
executors, of the FIRST PART. 
 
IN FAVOUR OF 
 
Smt, Ragini, wife of late Sh. X, resident of _________, Delhi, hereinafter called the 
RELEASEE which expression shall, unless repugnant to the context or meaning hereof, mea n 
and include her heirs, successors, legal representatives and executors, of the SECOND PART. 
 
WHEREAS late Sh. X was the sole and absolute owner of property bearing No.____, Delhi 
consisting of double Storey house built over an area of 200 sq yds; 
AND WHEREAS the said Sh. X expired on 25th April, 1990; 
AND WHEREAS releasors No. 1 to 3 are the daughters of late Sh. X Releassor No. 4 is the 
son and the Releasee is the wife of late Sh. X. and each has got 1/5th  share in the above 
mentioned house according to the law of inheritance; 
AND WHEREAS besides the Releasors and the Releasee, there is no other legal heir of the 
deceased or anybody else is entitled to or claims any right, title or inte rest in the above 
mentioned property; 
AND WHEREAS the Releasors are desirous of giving up their 4/5th share in the above 
mentioned property in favour of the Releasee on account of natural love and affection wi thout 
receipt of any consideration amount from her. 
 
NOW THIS DEED OR RELINQUISHMENT WITNESSES AS UNDER: 
1. That  the Releasors voluntarily, without any outside pressure from any side and in 
their full senses give-up and release all their right, title and inter est in property No._____, 
Delhi alongwith the land beneath the same measuring 200 sq. yds in favour of the Releas ee 
 123  
without  taking or receiving any consideration from them to the extent of thei r 4/5th share an d 
now the Releasee is the absolute and the sole owner  of the above mentioned property. (4/ 5th 
share of the Releasors and 1/5th share of the Releasee herself). 
2. That the Releasors, their heirs, successors and assigns have been left with no c laim, 
title or interest in the property hereby relinquished and the Releasee is th e sole and absolute 
owner thereof. 
3. That the possession of the above mentioned property is exclusively with the Releasee  
and the Releasee is entitled to continue the same. 
4. That the Releasee is fully entitled to get the above mentioned property mutated and 
transferred in her name on the basis of this deed of Relinquishment. 
5. That the original sale-deed and other relevant papers regarding the above mentioned 
property are with the Releasee. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Releasors ad the Releasee have set their respective hands  to 
this deed of Relinquishment at Delhi on the date mentioned above. 
 
 
RELEASORS 
 
RELEASEE 
 
 
WITNESSES :                               
 
1. Mr. P son of ______ 
Resident of _______ 
      
2. Mr. Q son of ______                                                                                     
Resident of _______  
 
* * * * * 
  
 124  
GIFT DEED 
 
THIS GIFT DEED is made and executed on this ……………….day of Month of ………… of 
the Year …………, at…………………………….  
 
BETWEEN 
 
(Name) son/daughter/wife of (Father ’s/Husband ’s name), Age……Marital Status………, 
(Profession), (Nationality), Resident of ………………………………holding Aadhar card 
No…………………(hereinafter called the DONOR) of the one part.  
 
AND  
 
(Name) son/daughter/wife of (Father ’s/Husband ’s name),, Age……Marital Status………, 
(Professional Status), ( Nationality), Resident of ………………………………holding 
Aadhar card No………………… (hereinafter called the DONEE) of the other part.  
 
The expressions of the DONOR and the DONEE shall mean and include their respective 
heirs, successors, executors, nominees, assignees, administrators and legal representatives e tc.  
 
AND WHEREAS the DONOR is the owner and in possession of the property having been 
purchased/acquired vide registered sale deed as docume nt No. ………………, Addl. Book -I--
--, Vol. No…………pages ...to... ., on date ……………………duly regd. in the office of 
SR………  
 
(This recital should be about how the vendors have acquired the title of the property.)  
 
AND WHEREAS the above PROPERTY, more particularly described in schedule 
hereinbelow, is free from all sorts of encumbrances such as liens, charges, claim, l iabilities, 
acquisitions, injunctions or attachments from any Court of Law, gifts, mortgages, demand s, 
notices, notifications, legal disputes, difference, prior sale and flaws etc. etc. and the DONOR 
is fully entitled to dispose of the same.  
 
AND WHEREAS the DONOR has great love and affection for the DONEE being 
his/her…….(Relation).  
 
AND WHEREAS the DONOR has agreed to GIFT, without any monetary consideration the  
property described in Schedule hereinbelow UNTO the DONEE and the DONEE has al so 
agreed to accept the same. 
 
NOW THIS GIFT DEED WITNESSETH AS UNDER:  
(1) That the DONOR does hereby donate/gift the property,______________________ 
__________, UNTO _________________ S/O, D/O, W/O __________________, R/O, 
 125  
______________ on account of great love and affection for him/her being 
HIS/HER_______________ (Relation)  
(2) The possession of the aforesaid PROPERTY UNDER DONATION/GIFT has b een 
handed-over/ delivered to the DONEE by the DONOR. 
(3) That the DONEE has now become the absolute and exclusive Owner with all right s in the 
aforesaid PROPERTY UNDER DONATION/GIFT from today and shall also enjoy all  rights 
of Ownership etc. therein.  
(4) The DONOR has now been left with no right, title, interests or liens et c. whatsoever of 
any sort in the aforesaid PROPERTY UNDER DONATION/GIFT henceforth after  the 
execution/ registration of this GIFT DEED. The property in question is free from acquisition 
neither by the Govt. nor by any other authority.  
(5) That the DONEE with HIS/ HER own funds shall get the PROPERTY UNDER 
DONATION/GIFT transferred/mutated in his favour in the records of Rig hts of Revenue 
Department on the basis of this GIFT DEED and DONOR hereby conveys his No Objection  
for the mutation of the property herein below mentioned under schedule, in the name of t he 
DONEE. 
(6) That the DONEE has accepted the GIFT of the said PROPERTY UNDER DONAT ION / 
GIFT DEED and has also taken-over the possession of the same from the DONOR. 
(7) That the market value of the above mentioned PROPERTY UNDER DONATION/G IFT 
has been assessed at Rs.___________ (Rupees_______________ only), as per Notification 
published in Official Gazettee, Series; _____ No. __________. Dated: ___________  
(8) That all the expenses of the GIFT DEED such as Stamp Duty, and registration Fees  etc. 
have been borne and paid by the DONOR/ DONEE.  
(9) That all future taxes, cesses, rates or any other Govt. or Municipal dues and dem ands in 
respect of the above mentioned PROPERTY UNDER DONATION/GIFT shall be borne and 
paid by the DONEE.  
(10) That all the Title Deeds/papers including previous title deed (in originals) r elating to the 
Gifted PROPERTY, herein below mentioned UNDER DONATION/GIFT have been handed-
over/delivered to the DONEE by the DONOR.  
 
SCHEDULE  
(The complete description of the Property shall be stated here which should include Survey  
Nos and Sub Division incase of Villages / Chalta Nos, P.T. Sheet Nos incase of C ities, Area, 
 126  
and Inscription/Description Nos along with Matriz Nos if avalaible) an boundari es of the 
Properties)  
 
East:  
West:  
North:  
South:  
DONOR  
 
DONEE 
 
 
WITNESSES :                               
 
1. Mr. P son of ______ 
Resident of _______ 
      
2. Mr. Q son of ______                                                                                     
Resident of _______  
 
* * * * * 
  
 127  
NOTICE OF EJECTMENT THROUGH ADVOCATE 
(SECTION 106 OF THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882) 
A… GUPTA  
Advocate    Ch. No. …, Delhi High Court  
   New Delhi. 
   Ph.011- 2338XXXX 
REGD A/D   /   U.P.C. 
 Dated……………………  
To 
……………………..   
Sub: NOTICE UNDER SECTION 106 OF THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 
1882 FOR EJECTMENT 
 
Dear Sir, 
Under the instructions from and on behalf of my client Sh. ……S/O……R/O….(hereinafter 
referred to as ‘my client ’), I serve you with the following notice : 
1. That the house bearing no…….situated at…..in……city is owned by my client. That 
you approached my client and requested my client to give the said property on lease to you. 
2. That my client has inducted you as the tenant in respect of the said property . That the 
agreed monthly rent for the said property is Rs……..per month.  
3. I hereby give you notice that you are to quit and vacate the said property belo w of 
which you are now in possession of as a monthly (or yearly) tenant under my said client 
immediately on the expiry of the last day of………….  
4. On and from the first of…..(month next following the last day of the month on which  
the tenant is required to quit) the tenancy hereto before subsisting shall term inate and all 
relationship of landlord and tenant between my client and you shall absoulutely cease. 
5. You are requested to deliver vacant possession of the said premises unto my client on 
that date as stated above.  
6. In case of your failure to quit the premises as desired, you will be consider ed as a 
trespasser and ejected in due course of law and you will have to pay damages at rate of 
Rs………..per…… until you are evicted.   
Yours faithfully 
Advocate  
Copy kept in my office for future reference and use. 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
 128  
NOTICE OF SUIT UNDER SECTION 80 OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 
1908 AGAINST THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
 
A… GUPTA  
Advocate    Ch. No. …, Delhi High Court  
   New Delhi. 
   Ph.011- 2338XXXX 
REGD A/D   /   U.P.C. 
 
 Dated……………………  
 
To 
The Secretary 
Government of India 
Education Department 
Central Secretariat 
New Delhi 
 
Sub: NOTICE UNDER SECTION 80 OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 
 
Dear Sir, 
 
Under instructions from my client……………………an employee in Section…………..of 
the Department of Education, Central Secretariat, New Delhi I hereby give you notice  under 
S.80 of the Code of Civil Procedure and state that my aforesaid client intends t o sue the 
Union of India owing and representing the Department of Education, Central Secretari at, 
New Delhi after the expiry of two months after the service of this notice unles s reliefs 
claimed herein below are granted to my said client within the said period of two m onths. The 
following particulars of the nature of the claim, cause of action and reli efs claimed are given 
below: 
(1) Name and description           Sri……………..son of………….by  
      of the Plaintiff occupation…….residing at……….  
 
(2) Cause of Action (a) ………..was an employee……….section of the department of 
education, Government of India, Central Secretariat, New Delhi. He has been dismiss ed from 
service illegally with effect from………..  
 (b) …………….. was charged falsely for an alleged theft in the office 
on…………..an d charge sheeted and ultimately dismissed from service with effect 
from……….  
 (c) Cause of action for the suit arose on…………….the date of dismissal.  
 
 129  
(3) Reliefs sought for (a) Reinstatement of Sri……………………  
 (b) Recovery of salary for the period of………..to……..  
 
Yours faithfully 
Advocate 
Copy kept in my office for future reference and use. 
* * * * * 
 
  
 130  
 
NOTICE UNDER SECTION 138 OF THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881 
     
 
A… GUPTA  
Advocate    Ch. No. …, Delhi High Court  
   New Delhi. 
   Ph.011- 2338XXXX 
 
REGD A/D   /   U.P.C. 
Dated: 
To, 
Sh. …………….,  
………… Connaught Place,  
New Delhi -110001 
And also at: 
………….  
Vikas Puri 
New Delhi-110018 
 
SUB: LEGAL NOTICE UNDER SECTION 138 OF THE NEGOTIABLE 
INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881 
 
Dear Sir, 
 
Under the instructions from and on behalf of my client Sh. …………., Daryaganj, New  
Delhi-110002 (hereinafter referred to as ‘my client ’), I serve you with the following notice: 
1. That my client is engaged in the business of trading of sewing machines. Dur ing the 
ordinary course of business you addressee purchased from my client the said sewing 
machines for which you issued a cheque bearing no…..dated….. of United Bank of India, 
Khanpur Branch, Khanpur Extn. New Delhi-110062 for a sum of Rs.2,45,700/-, as par t 
payment towards discharge of your liability which you addressee had incurred by way of 
purchasing aforesaid sewing machines from my client. 
2. That the above-mentioned cheque was deposited by my client with his banker HDFC 
Bank Ltd., 28, Punjabi Bagh, Ne w Delhi, for encashment on……(Date)  
3. That the said cheque was returned to my client with an endorsement “Dishonoured 
for insufficiency of funds. ” That the dishonoured cheque along with the cheque returning 
memo of bank dated…….was returned to my client.  
5. That for the first time my client came to know about the dishonouring of the sa id 
cheque on……...  
6. That on account of the dishonouring of the cheque you addressee are guilty of 
committing offences punishable u/s 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 (as amended 
up to date). 
 
 131  
Now through this legal notice I hereby call upon you addressee to make the payment of 
Rs.2,45,700/-, amount of the said dishonoured cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of 
this notice, failing which my client shall be constrained to take legal action against  you by 
way of civil as well as criminal proceedings, at your risk as to cost and  consequences 
resulting therefrom. 
 
 
 
Yours Sincerely 
Advocate 
 
Copy kept in my office for future reference and use. 
* * * * * 
 
 
  Name of the Advocate 
Advocate   …………… Jangpura Extn.  
   New Delhi-110019 
   Ph.011- 2437XXXX 
 132  
REPLY TO LEGAL NOTICE 
 
B… GUPTA  
Advocate    Ch. No. …, Delhi High Court  
   New Delhi. 
   Ph.011- 2338XXXX 
 
REGD A/D   /   U.P.C. 
Dated: 
     
To, 
Sh. ………..Advocate,  
……, Delhi High Court,   
New Delhi-110001 
 
SUB: REPLY TO YOUR LEGAL NOTICE U/S 138 NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT ACT,  
DATED……….  
 
Dear Sir, 
 
Your legal notice dated 09.06.2015 has been placed before me by my client Sh. 
………………….at Connaught Place, New Delhi -110001 and I, the undersigned, have been 
instructed  to reply to your said notice by my client on his behalf as under: 
 
A. That, at the outset you are being informed that the notice under reply, you have sent 
on behalf of your above said client, contains false and frivolous facts provided by your  said 
client against my client, thereby your notice under reply deserves to be withdr awn, with 
unconditional apology by your client, because the claim made by you is without any basis  and 
is based upon concocted facts, as no claim is made out against my client and in fav our of your 
client.  
B. That, in fact, my client did not place any order for supply of any machines 
whatsoever, as alleged by you. But, with a view to dispose off your old stock of outda ted 
machines, you requested my client to place them at his shop for sale. Keeping  in view old 
relations my client agreed to your client ’s proposal, which was subject to the condition that 
payment would be made only after those machines were sold out. However, those machi nes 
were not only outdated, but were also mechanically faulty, because of which til l date they are 
lying with my client, which your client is at liberty to take back with two days ’ prior notice. It 
is pertinent to mention here that the cheque in question was handed over by my client bl ank 
and the same was to be used  only upon instructions of my client, after he could  sold out your 
all those machines. 
C. That, however, your client has cheated my client by misusing that cheque which is 
not in the handwriting of my client. As a matter of fact, your client has com mitted fraud in the 
matter and, consequently, is liable to be proceeded under the relevant provisions of law.  
 133  
D. That, therefore, it is denied that the cheque in question was issued by my client to 
your client in discharge of any liability. Rather, your client has misused th at blank cheque 
with ulterior motives, after forging the same.  
REPLY ON MERITS: 
 
1. That the contents of para 1 of your legal notice are wrong and denied and whatsoever 
is stated above is reiterated.  It is denied that my client purchased from you client any 
machines whatsoever. Rather, my client helped your client to keep your machines in  his 
godown/shop for disposal. Therefore, it is denied that the cheque in question was issue d in 
discharge of any liability towards my client, as alleged in this para. 
2.  That the contents of para 2 are denied for want of knowledge. However, it is 
reiterated that my client ever issued any cheque, in the manner as alleged by you.  
3. That, in reply to para 3 of your legal notice, what is stated above is reiterat ed. It is 
submitted that your client was not entitled to use that cheque for encashment an d deposit the 
same in his bank.  
4. That the contents of para ’s 4 &5 are denied for want of knowledge. However, it is 
reiterated that any cheque was issued in discharge of any liability towards my  client to your 
client.  
5.  That the contents of para 6 need no comments. However, it is denied that my client 
committed any offence whatsoever.  
 
In view of aforesaid facts and circumstances, you are being advised to further advice  your 
client to withdraw the said notice under reply and further advise him not to drag my client in 
any frivolous litigation, failing which my client shall be constrained to contes t the same, 
besides proceeding against your client under the relevant provisions of law, at the cost s, risks 
and consequences of your client only.  
 
Yours Sincerely, 
Advocate 
 
Copy kept in my office for future reference and use. 
 
* * * * *