1 
CRM-M-1210-2023  
1 
   IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA   
    AT CHANDIGARH  
   
CRM-M-1210-2023   
Reserved on: 16.01.2023 
Pronounced on: 08.02.2023 
  
Hussain Abbas alias Tippu    ...Petitioner 
Versus       
State of Haryana     …Respondent 
 
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ANOOP CHITKARA 
 
Present:  Mr. Rajiv Kumar Saini, Advocate for the p etitioner. 
 
  Mr. Rajat Gautam, DAG, Haryana. 
 
     **** 
ANOOP CHITKARA, J.  
 
FIR No. Dated Police Station Sections 
84 19.04.2022 Sadar 
Bahadurgarh, Distt. 
Jhajjar 148, 149, 307 IPC (427 IPC 
added later on) and 25(1B) of 
Arms Act 
 
1. The petitioner, incarcerating upon his arrest in  the FIR captioned above, has come 
up before this Court under Section 439 of Code of C riminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) 
seeking bail. 
 
2. In paragraph 14 of the bail petition, the accuse d declares the following criminal 
antecedents: 
 
Sr. No. FIR No.  Date Offences Police Station 
1 200 08.09.2022  25(1B)A of Arms Act Sadar Bahadurgarh, 
Distt. Jhajjar 
 
 
3. Petitioner’s counsel has drawn attention of this  court to bail orders of other 
similarly placed  co-accused, passed by this Court in CRM-M-33571-2022  and CRM-M-
43651-2021 on 23.08.2022 (Annexure  P-3 ) and 30.09 .2022 (Annexure P-4) 
respectively. Counsel for petitioner claims bail on  the grounds of parity and does not 
press on merits.  
 
4.   State does not dispute the fact that the alleg ations against the petitioner are not 
more severe than co accused who was granted bail 
 1 of 7
::: Downloaded on - 09-02-2023 15:30:07 :::

2 
CRM-M-1210-2023  
2 
 REASONING : 
 
5. In Maulana Mohd Amir Rashadi v. State of U.P . , (2012) 3 SCC 382, Hon’ble 
Supreme Court holds, 
[10] It is not in dispute and highlighted that the second respondent is 
a sitting Member of Parliament facing several crimi nal cases. It is also 
not in dispute that most of the cases ended in acqu ittal for want of 
proper witnesses or pending trial. As observed by t he High Court, 
merely on the basis of criminal antecedents, the cl aim of the second 
respondent cannot be rejected. In other words, it i s the duty of the 
Court to find out the role of the accused in the ca se in which he has 
been charged and other circumstances such as possib ility of fleeing 
away from the jurisdiction of the Court etc.  
 
 
6. In Paramjeet Singh v. State of Punjab , CRM-M 50243 of 2021, this court observed, 
While considering each bail petition of the accused  with a criminal 
history, it throws an onerous responsibility upon t he Courts to act 
judiciously with reasonableness because arbitrarine ss is the antithesis 
of law. The criminal history must be of cases where  the accused was 
convicted, including the suspended sentences and al l pending First 
Information Reports, wherein the bail petitioner st ands arraigned as 
an accused. In reckoning the number of cases as cri minal history, the 
prosecutions resulting in acquittal or discharge, o r when Courts 
quashed the FIR; the prosecution stands withdrawn, or prosecution 
filed a closure report; cannot be included. Althoug h crime is to be 
despised and not the criminal, yet for a recidivist , the contours of a 
playing field are marshy, and graver the criminal h istory, slushier the 
puddles.  
 
 
7. As per paragraph 13 of the bail petition, the pe titioner is in custody since 
15.09.2022. Perusal of the orders dated 23.08.2022 and 30.09.2022, vide which co 
accused were granted bail, covers petitioner’s case  on the grounds of parity for the 
reasons that they are identically placed.  It is ap propriate to reproduce paragraph 3 and 
6 of the order dated 23.08.2022, which is as follow s:- 
“3.  The complainant alleged that he and his associ ates work for finance 
companies, and when they were stopping those vehicl es, whose 
installments were not paid, then at that time they noticed the accused in 
their car, which was financed by the complainant’s company and whose 
installments had not been cleared. On asked to stop , the occupants 
drove away, on which the complainant party chased t hem and were able 
to catch, and on this, the accused brutally assault ed them. 
6.  The allegations clearly reveal that it was the complainant party who 
had chased the accused.  Thus it is improbable to s ay with certainty 
about who was the aggressor.  They may have acted i n the right of their 
private defence. Thus, a primafacie analysis of the  nature of allegations, 
injuries inflicted by the petitioner, and other fac tors peculiar to this case, 
there would be no justifiability for custodial or p re-trial incarceration at 
this stage. Furthermore, the petitioner is a first offender, and one of the 
relevant factors would be to provide an opportunity  to course-correct. 
Even a primafacie perusal of paragraph 6 of the bai l petition needs 
consideration for bail.” 
 2 of 7
::: Downloaded on - 09-02-2023 15:30:08 :::

3 
CRM-M-1210-2023  
3 
  
8. In Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v State of Punjab , 1980 (2) SCC 565, (Para 30), a 
Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court held that the  bail decision must enter the 
cumulative effect of the variety of circumstances j ustifying the grant or refusal of bail. In 
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav , 2005 (2) SCC 42, (Para 18) a 
three-member Bench of Supreme Court held that the p ersons accused of non-bailable 
offences are entitled to bail if the Court concerne d concludes that the prosecution has 
failed to establish a prima facie case against him,  or despite the existence of a prima 
facie case, the Court records reasons for its satis faction for the need to release such 
person on bail, in the given fact situations. The r ejection of bail does not preclude filing 
a subsequent application. The courts can release on  bail, provided the circumstances 
then prevailing requires, and a change in the fact situation. In State of Rajasthan v 
Balchand , AIR 1977 SC 2447, (Para 2 & 3), Supreme Court not iceably illustrated that the 
basic rule might perhaps be tersely put as bail, no t jail, except where there are 
circumstances suggestive of fleeing from justice or  thwarting the course of justice or 
creating other troubles in the shape of repeating o ffences or intimidating witnesses and 
the like by the petitioner who seeks enlargement on  bail from the Court. It is true that 
the gravity of the offence involved is likely to in duce the petitioner to avoid the course 
of justice and must weigh when considering the ques tion of jail. So also, the 
heinousness of the crime. In GudikantiNarasimhulu v  Public Prosecutor , (1978) 1 SCC 
240, (Para 16), Supreme Court held that the delicat e light of the law favors release 
unless countered by the negative criteria necessita ting that course. In Prahlad Singh 
Bhati v NCT, Delhi , (2001) 4 SCC 280, Supreme Court highlighted one o f the factors for 
bail to be the public or the State's immense intere st and similar other considerations. In 
Dataram Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh , (2018) 3 SCC 22, (Para 6), Supreme Court held 
that the grant or refusal of bail is entirely withi n the discretion of the judge hearing the 
matter and though that discretion is unfettered, it  must be exercised judiciously, 
compassionately, and in a humane manner. Also, cond itions for the grant of bail ought 
not to be so strict as to be incapable of complianc e, thereby making the grant of bail 
illusory. 
 
9.  The possibility of the accused influencing the investigation, tampering with 
evidence, intimidating witnesses, and the likelihoo d of fleeing justice, can be taken care 
of by imposing elaborative and stringent conditions . In Sushila Aggarwal , (2020) 5 SCC 1, 
Para 92, the Constitutional Bench held that unusual ly, subject to the evidence 
produced, the Courts can impose restrictive conditi ons. 
 
10. Without commenting on the case's merits, in the  facts and circumstances peculiar 
to this case, and for the reasons mentioned above, the petitioner makes a case for bail, 
subject to the following terms and conditions, whic h shall be over and above and 3 of 7
::: Downloaded on - 09-02-2023 15:30:08 :::

4 
CRM-M-1210-2023  
4 
 irrespective of the contents of the form of bail bo nds in chapter XXXIII of CrPC, 1973. 
 
11. In Mahidul Sheikh v.  State of Haryana , CRM-33030-2021 in CRA-S-363-2020, 
decided on 14-01-2022, Para 53, [Law Finder Doc Id # 1933969], this Court observed,  
[53]. The pragmatic approach is that while granting  bail with 
sureties, the “Court” and the “Arresting Officer” s hould give a choice 
to the accused to either furnish surety bonds or to  handover a fixed 
deposit, or direct electronic money transfer where such facility is 
available, or creating a lien over his bank account . The accused 
should also have a further option to switch between  the modes. The 
option lies with the accused to choose between the sureties and 
deposits and not with the Court or the arresting of ficer. 
 
 
12. Given above, provided the petitioner is not req uired in any other case , the 
petitioner shall be released on bail in the FIR cap tioned above, in the following terms : 
 
(a). Petitioner to furnish  personal bond of Rs. Ten thousand (INR 10,000/-); A ND 
 
(b) To give one surety of Rs. Twenty-five thousand (INR 25,000/-), to the satisfaction of 
the concerned court, and in case of non-availabilit y, any nearest Ilaqa Magistrate/duty 
Magistrate. Before accepting the surety, the concer ned court must satisfy that if the 
accused fails to appear in court, then such surety can produce the accused before the 
court. 
 
OR 
 
(b) Petitioner to hand over to the concerned court a fixed deposit for Rs. Ten Thousand 
only (INR 10,000/-), with the clause of automatic r enewal of the principal and the 
interest reverting to the linked account, made in f avor of the ‘Chief Judicial Magistrate’ 
of the concerned district. Said fixed deposit may b e made from any of the banks where 
the stake of the State is more than 50% or any of t he well-established and stable 
private sector banks. The fixed deposit need not ne cessarily be made from the 
petitioner's account.  
 
(c). Such court shall have a lien over the deposit until the case's closure or discharged 
by substitution, or up to the expiry of the period mentioned under S. 437-A CrPC, 1973, 
and at that stage, subject to the proceedings under  S. 446 CrPC, the entire amount of 
fixed deposit, less taxes if any, shall be endorsed /returned to the depositor.  
 
(d). It shall be the total discretion of the petiti oner to choose between surety bond and 
fixed deposit. It shall also be open for the petiti oner to apply to the Investigator or the 
concerned court to substitute the fixed deposit wit h surety bonds and vice-versa. 
 
(e). On the reverse page of personal bond, the peti tioner shall mention her/his 
permanent address along with the phone number, pref erably that number which is 
linked with the AADHAR, and e-mail (if any). In cas e of any change in the above 
particulars, the petitioner shall immediately and n ot later than 30 days from such 
modification, intimate about the change to the conc erned police station and the 
concerned court. 
 
(f). The petitioner is to also execute a bond for a ttendance in the concerned court(s) as 
and when asked to do so. The presentation of the pe rsonal bond shall be deemed 
acceptance of the declarations made in the bail pet ition and all other stipulations, 4 of 7
::: Downloaded on - 09-02-2023 15:30:08 :::

5 
CRM-M-1210-2023  
5 
 terms, and conditions of section 438(2) of the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and 
also of this bail order. 
 
13. The petitioner shall not influence, browbeat, p ressurize, make any inducement, 
threat, or promise, directly or indirectly, to the witnesses, the Police officials, or any 
other person acquainted with the facts and the circ umstances of the case, to dissuade 
them from disclosing such facts to the Police, or t he Court, or to tamper with the 
evidence. 
 
14. Within fifteen days of release from prison, the  petitioner shall procure a 
smartphone and inform its IMEI number and other det ails to the SHO/I.O. of the Police 
station mentioned above. The petitioner shall alway s keep the phone location/GPS on 
the “ON” mode. Whenever the Investigating officer a sks to share the location, the 
petitioner shall immediately do so. The petitioner shall neither clear the location 
history, WhatsApp chats, call logs nor format the p hone without permission of the 
concerned SHO/I.O. This condition shall continue ti ll the completion of the trial or 
closure of case, whichever is earlier . If the petitioner fails to comply with this 
condition, then on this ground alone, the bail migh t be canceled, and the complainant 
may file any such application for the cancellation of bail, and State shall file the said 
application . 
 
15. Given the nature of the allegations and the oth er circumstances peculiar to this 
case, the petitioner shall surrender all weapons, f irearms, ammunition, if any, along 
with the arms license to the concerned authority wi thin fifteen days from release from 
prison and inform the Investigator about the compli ance. However, subject to the 
Indian Arms Act, 1959, the petitioner shall be enti tled to renew and take it back in case 
of acquittal in this case, provided otherwise permi ssible in the concerned rules.  
 
16. Till the completion of the trial, the petitione r shall not contact, call, text, message, 
remark, stare, stalk, make any gestures or express any unusual or inappropriate, verbal 
or otherwise objectionable behavior towards the vic tim and victim's family, either 
physically, or through phone call or any other soci al media, through any other mode, 
nor shall unnecessarily roam around the victim's ho me.  
 
17. Given the nature of the allegations and the oth er circumstances peculiar to this 
case, the petitioner shall not enter the property, workplace, and the residence of the 
victim and shall also not enter within a radius of one kilometer from the victim’s home 
till the recording of the statements of all non-off icial and informal witnesses in the trial . 
This Court is imposing this condition to rule out a ny attempt by the accused to 
incapacitate, influence, or cause any discomfort to  the victim. Reference be made to 
Vikram Singh v Central Bureau of Investigation, 201 8 All SCR (Crl.) 458); and Aparna 5 of 7
::: Downloaded on - 09-02-2023 15:30:08 :::

6 
CRM-M-1210-2023  
6 
 Bhatt v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 2021 SCC Online S C 230. 
 
18. During the trial's pendency, if the petitioner repeats  or commits any offence 
where the sentence prescribed is more than seven ye ars or violates any condition as 
stipulated in this order, it shall always be permis sible to the respondent to apply for 
cancellation of this bail. It shall further be open  for any investigating agency to bring it 
to the notice of the Court seized of the subsequent  application that the accused was 
earlier cautioned not to indulge in criminal activi ties. Otherwise, the bail bonds shall 
remain in force throughout the trial and after that  in Section 437-A of the Cr.P .C., if not 
canceled due to non-appearance or breach of conditi ons. 
 
19.  In return for the protection from further inca rceration at this stage, the Court 
believes that the accused shall also reciprocate th rough desirable behavior. It is 
clarified that in case the petitioner does not mend  his ways and repeats the offence or 
indulge in criminal behaviour, then in all future m atters, the concerned courts shall 
keep it as a factor that this court had afforded a final opportunity to the petitioner to 
reform and live a normal lifebut did not mend his w ays . 
 
20. The conditions mentioned above imposed by this court are to endeavour that the 
accused does not repeat the offence and to ensure t he safety of the witnesses, victim, 
and their families. In Mohammed Zubair v. State of NCT of Delhi, Writ Petition (Criminal) 
No 279 of 2022, Para 29, decided on July 20, 2022, A Three-Judge bench of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court holds that “The bail conditions impos ed by the Court must not only 
have a nexus to the purpose that they seek to serve  but must also be proportional to 
the purpose of imposing them. The courts while impo sing bail conditions must balance 
the liberty of the accused and the necessity of a f air trial. While doing so, conditions 
that would result in the deprivation of rights and liberties must be eschewed.” 
 
21. Any Advocate for the petitioner and the Officer  in whose presence the petitioner 
puts signatures on personal bonds shall explain all  conditions of this bail order in any 
language that the petitioner understands. 
 
22.  If the petitioner finds bond amount beyond soc ial and financial reach, it may be 
brought to the notice of this Court for appropriate  reduction. Further, if the petitioner 
finds bail condition(s) as violating fundamental, h uman, or other rights, or causing 
difficulty due to any situation, then for modificat ion of such term(s), the petitioner may 
file a reasoned application before this Court, and after taking cognizance, even to the 
Court taking cognizance or the trial Court, as the case may be, and such Court shall also 
be competent to modify or delete any condition. 
 
23.   This order does not, in any manner, limit or restrict the rights of the Police or the 6 of 7
::: Downloaded on - 09-02-2023 15:30:08 :::

7 
CRM-M-1210-2023  
7 
 investigating agency from further investigation as per law. 
 
24. In case the Investigator/Officer-In-Charge of t he concerned Police Station arraigns 
another section of any penal offence in this FIR, a nd if the new section prescribes 
maximum sentence which is not greater than the sect ions mentioned above, then this 
bail order shall be deemed to have also been passed  for the newly added section(s). 
However, suppose the newly inserted sections prescr ibe a sentence exceeding the 
maximum sentence prescribed in the sections mention ed above, then, in that case, the 
Investigator/Officer-In-Charge shall give the petit ioner notice of a minimum of seven 
days providing an opportunity to avail the remedies  available in law. 
 
25.    Any observation made hereinabove is neither an expression of opinion on the 
merits of the case nor shall the trial Court advert  to these comments. 
 
26. The SHO of the concerned police station or the investigating officer shall arrange 
to send a copy of this order, preferably a soft cop y, to the complainant and the victim, 
without any delay. If the victim(s) notice any viol ation of this order, they may inform the 
SHO of the concerned police station, the trial cour t, or even this court. 
 
27. There would be no need for a certified copy of this  order for furnishing bonds, and 
any Advocate for the Petitioner can download this o rder along with case status from the 
official web page of this Court and attest it to be  a true copy. In case the attesting officer 
wants to verify the authenticity, such an officer c an also verify its authenticity and may 
download and use the downloaded copy for attesting bonds.  
 
Petition allowed in aforesaid terms . All pending applications, if any, stand disposed.  
 
 
 
            (ANOOP CHITKARA) 
             JUDGE  
08.02.2023 
anju rani 
 
  
 
Whether speaking/reasoned:  Yes 
Whether reportable:   No. 
 
7 of 7
::: Downloaded on - 09-02-2023 15:30:08 :::