HIGH  COURT  OF PUNJAB  AND  HARYANA  AT CHANDIGARH   
NEW OBJECTIONS CHECK LIST CODES OF CIVIL WRIT PETITIONS  
(AS ON 05.03.2024)  
CIS 
CODE 
NO. ISHICO 
OLD 
CODE  Objection  Description  
 
 1. Show the competency of person, who has filed the 
present appeal/ petition/ review/ revision/ 
application etc.  
 
 2. Correct  provision of  law should be 
mentioned in  the appeal/petition/  revision/ 
application etc.  
86. 3. As to how the present  case/application  
/petition/appeal/revision  is maintainable 
in the present form in this Hon'ble Court?  
87. 4. (a) An affidavit duly attested with correct 
age/parentage/particulars of the deponent in 
support  of appeal/petition  
/application/review/  revision  should  be filed.  
(b) Handwritten insertions/corrections made in 
Application/ Appeal/ Revision/ Petition are not 
permissible and same should be fairly  typed/printed 
or duly signed by Ld. Counsel/Party.  
(c) Corrections/insertions made  in Affidavit(s)  should 
be duly attested again together with signature of 
deponent and the attesting Authority or fresh 
affidavit  
should  be filed.  
88. 5. (a) Each page of affidavit should be signed by the 
deponent for certification of facts, a certificate 
regarding the contents of affidavit which have been 
read over to the deponent in his regional language 
by the attesting authority.  
(b) Identification seal in the affidavit(s) should be 
verified/signed with legible and complete name.  
 
 6. State  case  is required  to be represented  by the 
authorized person.  
 
 7. Required  numbers  of paper  books  should  
be filed  and the same  should  be in order  and duly 
indexed.  
 
 8. Authorization/resolution  etc. should  be 
filed in case of registered body.  
89. 9. General power of Attorney/Special power of 
Attorney duly page marked and indexed should be 
filed.  
 
 10. General power of Attorney/ Special power of 
Attorney and other documents attached with the 
case, executed abroad should be duly embossed.  
 
 11. Correct  and complete  certified  copy  of 
Annexure(s) should be filed.  
90. 12. Title  of the case  in 
petition/appeal/revision/ application, index etc. 
should be same as per the Memo of Parties.  
91. 13. (a) Prescribed court fee should be affixed in 
the appeal/petition/revision/ review/cross - 
objection/ application  etc?  
(b) Court Fee stamps should be affixed on 
separate page and be page marked and be 
mentioned in Index.  
(c) Advocates Welfare Fund Stamp be affixed 
on POA.  
 
 14. Certificate  of non-availability  of stamp  
paper  may be obtained  from  stamp  
vendor.  
 
 15. Court  fee stamps  affixed  should  be in the name 
of applicant.  
 
 16. Memo  of parties  should  be filed  on a separate  
page.  
16(A) (i)  The mobile  Number  as well as the 
Passport  Number/Election  
Commissioner  ID Card  (Voter  ID Card) 
Number/Aadhaar  Card 
Number/e -Aadhaar  letter  downloaded  
from  UIDAI  Website or any other 
identity proof issued by  Government 
belonging  to the 
Petitioner(s)/Appellants(s)/Applic  ant(s) 
be mentioned  in the Memo  of Parties 
against  his/her/their name(s).  
(ii) Copy  of proof  of identity  i.e. 
Passport   Number/Election 
Commissioner  ID Card  (Voter  ID Card)  
Number/Aadhaar  Card 
Number/e -Aadhaar  letter 
downloaded  from  UIDAI  Website or 
any other identity proof issued by 
Government,  duly  attested by the 
learned  counsel  filing  the case  under  his 
seal with  Name  and Enrolment 
Number,  wherein  the residential  
address of  the 
Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)/Applica  nt(s) 
has been mentioned, be also annexed  
with  the fresh 
petition/Appeal  /Applicationn  for 
impleadment  as party,  at the time  of 
filing.  
(iii) Affidavit in support of the 
Petition/Appeal/Application  for 
impleadment  as a party  should  
  contain  Passport  
Number/Election Commissioner ID Card 
(Voter ID Card) Number/Aadhaar  Card 
Number/e -Aadhaar    letter 
downloaded from UIDAI Website or any 
other  identity  proof  issued  by 
Government belonging to the deponent 
to the effect that: - 
“Passport  Number/Election 
Commissioner ID Card (Voter ID Card) 
Number/Aadhaar Card Number/e - 
Aadhaar   letter  
downloaded from UIDAI Website or any 
other identity proof issued by 
Government has been annexed as a 
proof  of identity  and residential  address 
with  the Petition/Appeal/Application  for 
impleadment as a party.”  
(4) The submission of any information 
regarding  Aadhaar  Card  is identity  proof 
would not be mandatory.”  
92. 17. Serial  nos. (given  to 
petitioners/respondents) should be correctly 
mentioned    in   Memo    of   Party(ies)/POA/  
Vakalatnama Appeal/ 
Revision/Petition/Application  
93. 18. (a) Complete address with parentage should 
be mentioned in the memo of parties.  
(b) Age of the litigant(s)  be mentioned  in 
MOP.  
(c) Mention specifically in the Memo of Parties 
in all the cases filed in  this Hon’ble High  Court on 
Civil side as to which parties is/are the  
Contesting Respondent(s) and which is/are the 
Profroma Respondent(s).  
(d) Name of the natural/legal guardian who 
represents the minor(s) appellant(s)/petitioner(s)/ 
respondent(s) should be specifically mentioned in 
MOP/POA/Paper Book. (e) Name of the authorized 
signatory who represents the State/  Company/ 
Firm/GramPanchayat  
/Legal  Persona e tc. should be specifically 
mentioned in the MOP/POA/Paper book.  
94. 19. (a) Memo of parties should correspond  
according to impugned judgment/order.  
(b) Deceased person(s) should be impleaded 
correctly inMemo of Parties as per the  
instructions given in the daily cause list i.e. 
name(s) of LR(s) of deceased person should be 
mentioned below the name(s) of deceased 
person(s), and accordingly the title of the case 
should be mentioned/corrected in the whole 
paper book.  
(c) A specific para should be given in the LR 
application/impleading application regarding 
application has been drafted after  ascertaining 
upto  date  Memo  of 
Parties  of Main  Case  from  the Registry.  
(d) Caste or Religion shouldn’t be mentioned in the 
Memorandum of parties of a  petition/proceedings.  
 
 20. Correct  nomenclature  of the case  should  be given.  
 
 21. Memo  of parties  should  be signed  by the Learned  
Counsel/Parties.  
 
 22. Urgent  form  should  be filed  wherever  
necessary.  
95. 23. An affidavit  in support  of 
Appeal/Revision/Petition/Application should be  
filed.  
96. 24. (a) Complete  and correct  page  marking at 
the top right corner  should be done.  
(b) Para  Nos.  be correctly  mentioned  in the 
grounds  of Appeal/Revision/Petition  
/Application/Reply/  Written  Statement  etc. 
 
 25. Grounds  should  be duly verified  and 
signed  by the Learned  Counsel/Parties.  
 
 26. Law points  should  be formulated  with  the brief  
synopsis.  
 
 27. Impugned  orders/annexure  etc. should  be correctly 
mentioned  with  dates  in the paper -book,  head  
note,  prayer  clause.  
97. 28. (a) Head  note  and prayer  clause  complete  in all 
respects should be filed.  
(b) Head  note  and prayer  clause  of the 
Petition/Appeal/  Revision/Application  etc. 
should be specific and same  
98. 29. Complete  name  of Learned  
Counsel(s)/Parites  be mentioned  against 
his/her signature in whole paper book.  
 
 30. Duly  verified  and correctly  typed  copy  of 
annexure(s) should be filed.  
30 (A) (1) Where the self attested true typed copy 
of pictorial  and/or  photograph  is being  annexed 
with  any case  or application  as an Annexure,  the 
self attested  photcopy  of the original 
documents be also annexed.  
99. 31. (a) Complete Vernacular as well as complete 
translation of the annexure(s) should be filed.  
(b) Complete Photostat copies of all the 
documents with back side page(s), like Sale 
Deed/Agreement to Sell/GPA etc. whereupon 
something is inscribed or stamp etc. is fixed 
should also be filed on separate page.  
(c) Each  document  should be  page  marked  and 
mentioned in the Index accordingly including 
vernacular copies and  certified  copies  and 
Court  Fee Stamp  Papers  etc. 
100.  32. (a) Every pleading(s)  including  application(s), 
annexure(s) etc. in the High Court shall be in 
English language duly typed in blac k ink on both 
side of  superior quality legal  size paper  of 80 GSM 
and above. The font shall be Thorndale or Times 
New  Roman  in size 14 with  double  space. Margins 
on the top and bottom of the page shall be 1.25 
inches and 0.75 inch, respectively. The left s ide 
and right side  margins shall be  
1.25 inches. The number ing shall be at the top 
middle of each page and will run through both 
sides of the page, in accordance with rule 2(a) 
Chapter -1, Part A(a) High Court Rules and Orders 
Volume -V. 
(b) The certified  copy(ies)  on both  sides of  pages 
shall   be permitted  to  be filed.  
However,  the certified  copy(ies)/ 
photocopy(ies) dim  printed/not  legible  shall 
also be filed  with  legible  printed/ typed  copy  
of Annexure(s)/ Judgment(s)/Order(s). 
(c)Index/Application/Appeal/Revision/Pet ition 
should be fairly typed and should not be  dim 
printed  or illegible.  (d) As far as practicable  no 
set/bunch  of documents shall be annexed as a 
single annexure and each  document  shall  be 
annexed  as a separate  annexure.  
101.  33. (a) Vakalatnama/Power of Attorney should be 
duly signed with date by the parties, accepted 
and properly identified by the Learned 
Counsel(s).  
(b) In case, signature (s) of Petitioner (s)/ 
Appellant(s) / Respondent(s)/Applicant is/are 
obtained  on back  side of  Power  of Attorney,  then 
it should  be signed  and accepted  by the Ld 
Counsel(s).  
102.  34. (a) Power of Attorney should be duly filled in 
with enrolment no., address and contact number 
of the advocate, with e - mail address.  
(b) Correct Serial Numbers and names in capital 
letters in English Language should be mentioned 
against the signatures of parties in Power of 
Attorney  
/Vakalatnama.  
(c) Name  of the Ld. Govt.  Pleader  should  be 
mentioned  in the whole  paper  book  with  
full name  and signatures.  
103.  35. (a) Index should be properly prepared and duly 
filled in all columns i.e. serial nos. particulars, date, 
page no. and court fee etc.  
(b) A typed/printed note/certificate that  
‘Contents of Hard Copy and Soft Copy are same’ 
should be mentioned in the Index.  
(c) Following note be given at the bottom of the 
index in all cases relating to MP/MLAs:  
“Whether any sitting/formber MP/MLA is 
involved  in the case  or not?  .............  Yes/No”  
104 36. Index  should  be signed  by the advocate(s)/parties 
with enrolment no. and contact no.  
 
 37. Instructions regarding scrutinizing/filing available 
on website  of this Hon'ble  High  Court  should  be 
complied  with.  
105.  38. (a) An advance copy of misc. application along 
with documents i.e. written statement / reply 
etc. should be supplied to all the opposite 
party/counsel and acknowledgement of the 
same be affixed with complete legible name.  
(b) Advance copy should be supplied to opposite 
party (ies) through Registered Post if notice of 
motion i ssued and no one appeared.  
(c) Name, age and parentage of the 
Person/Employee/Authorized Signatory with 
designation in case of Govt. Servant should be 
mentioned  in the Reply/Written 
Statement/Application etc., who files the 
Reply/Written  
Statement/Application  etc. 
106.  39. (a) Section 148 -A CPC should be complied with 
(Caveat Note be given in Index)and if Caveat 
received, then acknowledgement of supply of 
advance copy of petition/appeal etc. should be 
obtained  on Index with complete name etc.  
(b) Regd. Postal Receipt(s) of sending advance 
copy of caveat petition to the proposed/expected  
Petitioner(s)/  Appellant(s)  should  be affixed  with  
the Caveat  Petition.  
107.  40. Court  fee of Rs.50/ - per petitioner  should  
be affixed.  
108.  41. Concise  list of dates  and events  should  be filed.  
109.  42. Civil Writ  Petition  should  have  correct  
para  numbering  
110.  43. Certified  copy  of order  of Central  
Administrative  Tribunal  should  be filed  
111.  44. Complete  copy  of paper  book  before  the Central 
Administrative Tribunal should be filed.  
112.  45. Secretary  of the concerned  department 
should be impleaded as a respondent  
113.  46. Petition  and Vakalatnama  should  be 
signed  by all the petitioners.  
114.  47. (a) Statement in terms of Rule -20 (I) (IV, V) 
Chpater -4, Part -F High Court Rule and Orders 
Volume -V regarding alternative remedy, similar 
petition and result thereof should be 
made/incorporated in the Petition. (b) Para 
regarding remedy of Appeal/Revision shou ld be 
incorporated in the Petition. (c) Para regarding 
no such  or similar  petition  has been  filed  
by the petitioner, be incorporated in the 
petition.  
115.  48. Notes below index should be made in terms of 
Rule 19, Part (III) of Part F, Chapter -4 High Court 
Rule and Orders Volume -V 
116.  49. Note  regarding  relevant/specific  Act/Rule  involved 
in the case should be given below  
in index  
117.  50. Note  regarding  page  no. and para  no. of the 
petition  for law points  should  be given  below  in 
index  
118.  51. Note regarding particulars of the similar case, 
pending or decided with brief statements of facts 
and point of law involved in the said case should 
be given below in Index. Copy of order(s) of 
decided case(s) should be  
appended  as Annexure.  
119.  52. PIL should be filed in terms of instructions issued 
by this Hon'ble Court as mentioned below: - (a) 
What is the personal interest of the petitioner(s) 
involved in the instant petition? If the instant 
petition  has been  filed  as Public  Interest  Litigation, 
then petition be filed according to P.I.L. Rules and 
comply with the following informations: - 1. Is the 
present Public Interest Litigation falling under PIL 
Rules, 2010? 2. How the present writ (PIL) is 
maintainable  under  Clause  6 of PIL Rules,  2010 .? 3. 
Writ Petition be filed according to directions 
passed by Hon’ble Division Bench in case titled 
Ajaib Singh Vs. State of Pb. & Ors. 2013 (4) PLR, 
367, which is available on High Court Website. 4. 
Petitioner has to specifically disclose his 
credentials  and his direct or indirect personal 
motive or interest involved in the case, if any, by 
way of an affidavit. 5. Registration Certificate of 
the Society be filed with the Petition. 6. Has the 
Petitioner approached the concerned authorities 
with a represent ation for redressal of his 
grievances?  
7. Documentary  proof  be also attached  
with the petition regarding information 
Nos. 4 to 7 above, with proper reply.  
120.  53. No separate exemption or other such like 
application(s) is/are admissible in civil writ 
petition and request if any should be made in 
the main prayer clause of the civil writ petition,  
if it pertains to exemption from filing certified  
copy of document(s)/annexure(s)  etc. or for 
placing  on record  document(s)/annexure(s)  etc. 
121.  54. Certificate  regarding  complete  copy  of original 
application  in CAT cases  should  be filed  by Learned  
Counsel.  
122.  55. An application along with affidavit should be  
filed for placing on record additional documents 
in CAT cases and in  the petitions  under 
Industrial  
Disputes  Act against  Labour  Cour  
123.  56. In Civil Writ Petition(s) of tax matters, PAN 
Number of the Petitioner(s)  should be 
mentioned  in Memo  of Parties   
124.  57. A Certificate  of counsel  should  be filed  in the 
petitions  under  Industrial  Disputes  Act against 
Labour  Court  Award  regarding  all the 
documents of petition have been duly produced 
before  the Labour  Court  and no additional 
documents have been attached with the 
petition.  
125.  58. Para regarding sufficient grounds should be 
given in the Review  Application in  terms  of Rule 
10 Chapter  
1 Part A(a) of High  Court  Rules  and Orders,  
VolumeV.  
126.  59. Index, List of Events, Grounds of  Petition and all 
annexures and vernaculars  should  be signed  
by Ld. 
Counsel/Parties.  
127.  60. Whether  Vires  of Rules  have  been  challenged  in 
the petition  by way of Notification/amendment  
of rules/clause? If so, the same be specifically 
mentioned in the Head Note and Prayer Clause 
of the Petition  and second  set of petition  be 
also filed,  being  DB Case.  
128.  61. As to how  the authority  (ies)  not made  
party  in the petition,  who  has passed  the orders?  
129.  62. As to how  deceased  persons(s) 
has/have been impleaded party (ies) in the  
petition?  
130.  63. Complete permanent address with parentage of 
petitioner(s)/respondent(s) should be given in 
affidavit(s) as well as in Memo of  Parties instead 
of ‘C/o’ address.